The Mill on the Floss

George Eliot

Table of Contents

Book I: Boy and Girl

1.  Outside Dorlcote Mill 2.  Mr. Tulliver, of Dorlcote Mill, Declares His Resolution about
Tom 3.  Mr. Riley Gives His Advice Concerning a School for Tom 4.  Tom Is Expected 5.  Tom
Comes Home 6.  The Aunts and Uncles Are Coming 7.  Enter the Aunts and Uncles 8.  Mr. Tulliver
Shows His Weaker Side 9.  To Garum Firs 10. Maggie Behaves Worse Than She Expected 11. Maggie
Tries to Run away from Her Shadow 12. Mr. and Mrs. Glegg at Home 13. Mr. Tulliver Further Entangles
the Skein of Life

Book II: School-Time

1.  Tom's "First Half" 2.  The Christmas Holidays 3.  The New Schoolfellow 4.  "The Young Idea"
5.  Maggie's Second Visit 6.  A Love-Scene 7.  The Golden Gates Are Passed

Book III: The Downfall

1.  What Had Happened at Home
2.  Mrs. Tulliver's Teraphim, or Household Gods
3.  The Family Council
4.  A Vanishing Gleam
5.  Tom Applies His Knife to the Oyster
6.  Tending to Refute the Popular Prejudice against the Present of a
    Pocket-Knife
7.  How a Hen Takes to Stratagem
8.  Daylight on the Wreck
9.  An Item Added to the Family Register

Book IV: The Valley of Humiliation

1.  A Variation of Protestantism Unknown to Bossuet 2.  The Torn Nest Is Pierced by the Thorns
3.  A Voice from the Past

Book V: Wheat and Tares

1.  In the Red Deeps 2.  Aunt Glegg Learns the Breadth of Bob's Thumb 3.  The Wavering Balance
4.  Another Love-Scene 5.  The Cloven Tree 6.  The Hard-Won Triumph 7.  A Day of Reckoning

Book VI: The Great Temptation

1.  A Duet in Paradise 2.  First Impressions 3.  Confidential Moments 4.  Brother and Sister
5.  Showing That Tom Had Opened the Oyster 6.  Illustrating the Laws of Attraction 7.  Philip
Re-enters 8.  Wakem in a New Light 9.  Charity in Full-Dress 10. The Spell Seems Broken 11.
In the Lane 12. A Family Party 13. Borne Along by the Tide 14. Waking

Book VII: The Final Rescue

1.  The Return to the Mill 2.  St. Ogg's Passes Judgment 3.  Showing That Old Acquaintances
Are Capable of Surprising Us 4.  Maggie and Lucy 5.  The Last Conflict

Book I

Boy and Girl

Chapter I

Outside Dorlcote Mill

A wide plain, where the broadening Floss hurries on between its green banks to the sea, and
the loving tide, rushing to meet it, checks its passage with an impetuous embrace. On this
mighty tide the black ships--laden with the fresh-scented fir-planks, with rounded sacks of
oil-bearing seed, or with the dark glitter of coal--are borne along to the town of St. Ogg's,
which shows its aged, fluted red roofs and the broad gables of its wharves between the low
wooded hill and the river-brink, tingeing the water with a soft purple hue under the transient
glance of this February sun. Far away on each hand stretch the rich pastures, and the patches
of dark earth made ready for the seed of broad-leaved green crops, or touched already with
the tint of the tender-bladed autumn-sown corn. There is a remnant still of last year's golden
clusters of beehive-ricks rising at intervals beyond the hedgerows; and everywhere the hedgerows
are studded with trees; the distant ships seem to be lifting their masts and stretching their
red-brown sails close among the branches of the spreading ash. Just by the red-roofed town
the tributary Ripple flows with a lively current into the Floss. How lovely the little river
is, with its dark changing wavelets! It seems to me like a living companion while I wander
along the bank, and listen to its low, placid voice, as to the voice of one who is deaf and
loving. I remember those large dipping willows. I remember the stone bridge.

And this is Dorlcote Mill. I must stand a minute or two here on the bridge and look at it,
though the clouds are threatening, and it is far on in the afternoon. Even in this leafless
time of departing February it is pleasant to look at,--perhaps the chill, damp season adds
a charm to the trimly kept, comfortable dwelling-house, as old as the elms and chestnuts that
shelter it from the northern blast. The stream is brimful now, and lies high in this little
withy plantation, and half drowns the grassy fringe of the croft in front of the house. As
I look at the full stream, the vivid grass, the delicate bright-green powder softening the
outline of the great trunks and branches that gleam from under the bare purple boughs, I am
in love with moistness, and envy the white ducks that are dipping their heads far into the
water here among the withes, unmindful of the awkward appearance they make in the drier world
above.

The rush of the water and the booming of the mill bring a dreamy deafness, which seems to heighten
the peacefulness of the scene. They are like a great curtain of sound, shutting one out from
the world beyond. And now there is the thunder of the huge covered wagon coming home with sacks
of grain. That honest wagoner is thinking of his dinner, getting sadly dry in the oven at this
late hour; but he will not touch it till he has fed his horses,--the strong, submissive, meek-eyed
beasts, who, I fancy, are looking mild reproach at him from between their blinkers, that he
should crack his whip at them in that awful manner as if they needed that hint! See how they
stretch their shoulders up the slope toward the bridge, with all the more energy because they
are so near home. Look at their grand shaggy feet that seem to grasp the firm earth, at the
patient strength of their necks, bowed under the heavy collar, at the mighty muscles of their
struggling haunches! I should like well to hear them neigh over their hardly earned feed of
corn, and see them, with their moist necks freed from the harness, dipping their eager nostrils
into the muddy pond. Now they are on the bridge, and down they go again at a swifter pace,
and the arch of the covered wagon disappears at the turning behind the trees.

Now I can turn my eyes toward the mill again, and watch the unresting wheel sending out its
diamond jets of water. That little girl is watching it too; she has been standing on just the
same spot at the edge of the water ever since I paused on the bridge. And that queer white
cur with the brown ear seems to be leaping and barking in ineffectual remonstrance with the
wheel; perhaps he is jealous because his playfellow in the beaver bonnet is so rapt in its
movement. It is time the little playfellow went in, I think; and there is a very bright fire
to tempt her: the red light shines out under the deepening gray of the sky. It is time, too,
for me to leave off resting my arms on the cold stone of this bridge....

Ah, my arms are really benumbed. I have been pressing my elbows on the arms of my chair, and
dreaming that I was standing on the bridge in front of Dorlcote Mill, as it looked one February
afternoon many years ago. Before I dozed off, I was going to tell you what Mr. and Mrs. Tulliver
were talking about, as they sat by the bright fire in the left-hand parlor, on that very afternoon
I have been dreaming of.

Chapter II

Mr. Tulliver, of Dorlcote Mill, Declares His Resolution about Tom

"What I want, you know," said Mr. Tulliver,--"what I want is to give Tom a good eddication;
an eddication as'll be a bread to him. That was what I was thinking of when I gave notice for
him to leave the academy at Lady-day. I mean to put him to a downright good school at Midsummer.
The two years at th' academy 'ud ha' done well enough, if I'd meant to make a miller and farmer
of him, for he's had a fine sight more schoolin' nor I ever got. All the learnin' my father
ever paid for was a bit o' birch at one end and the alphabet at th' other. But I should like
Tom to be a bit of a scholard, so as he might be up to the tricks o' these fellows as talk
fine and write with a flourish. It 'ud be a help to me wi' these lawsuits, and arbitrations,
and things. I wouldn't make a downright lawyer o' the lad,--I should be sorry for him to be
a raskill,--but a sort o' engineer, or a surveyor, or an auctioneer and vallyer, like Riley,
or one o' them smartish businesses as are all profits and no outlay, only for a big watch-chain
and a high stool. They're pretty nigh all one, and they're not far off being even wi' the law,
I believe; for Riley looks Lawyer Wakem i' the face as hard as one cat looks another. He's
none frightened at him."

Mr. Tulliver was speaking to his wife, a blond comely woman in a fan-shaped cap (I am afraid
to think how long it is since fan-shaped caps were worn, they must be so near coming in again.
At that time, when Mrs. Tulliver was nearly forty, they were new at St. Ogg's, and considered
sweet things).

"Well, Mr. Tulliver, you know best: I've no objections. But hadn't I better kill a couple o'
fowl, and have th' aunts and uncles to dinner next week, so as you may hear what sister Glegg
and sister Pullet have got to say about it? There's a couple o' fowl wants killing!"

"You may kill every fowl i' the yard if you like, Bessy; but I shall ask neither aunt nor uncle
what I'm to do wi' my own lad," said Mr. Tulliver, defiantly.

"Dear heart!" said Mrs. Tulliver, shocked at this sanguinary rhetoric, "how can you talk so,
Mr. Tulliver? But it's your way to speak disrespectful o' my family; and sister Glegg throws
all the blame upo'me, though I'm sure I'm as innocent as the babe unborn. For nobody's ever
heard me say as it wasn't lucky for my children to have aunts and uncles as can live independent.
Howiver, if Tom's to go to a new school, I should like him to go where I can wash him and mend
him; else he might as well have calico as linen, for they'd be one as yallow as th' other before
they'd been washed half-a-dozen times. And then, when the box is goin' back'ard and forrard,
I could send the lad a cake, or a pork-pie, or an apple; for he can do with an extry bit, bless
him! whether they stint him at the meals or no. My children can eat as much victuals as most,
thank God!"

"Well, well, we won't send him out o' reach o' the carrier's cart, if other things fit in,"
said Mr. Tulliver. "But you mustn't put a spoke i' the wheel about the washin,' if we can't
get a school near enough. That's the fault I have to find wi' you, Bessy; if you see a stick
i' the road, you're allays thinkin' you can't step over it. You'd want me not to hire a good
wagoner, 'cause he'd got a mole on his face."

"Dear heart!" said Mrs. Tulliver, in mild surprise, "when did I iver make objections to a man
because he'd got a mole on his face? I'm sure I'm rether fond o' the moles; for my brother,
as is dead an' gone, had a mole on his brow. But I can't remember your iver offering to hire
a wagoner with a mole, Mr. Tulliver. There was John Gibbs hadn't a mole on his face no more
nor you have, an' I was all for having you hire him; an' so you did hire him, an' if he hadn't
died o' th' inflammation, as we paid Dr. Turnbull for attending him, he'd very like ha' been
drivin' the wagon now. He might have a mole somewhere out o' sight, but how was I to know that,
Mr. Tulliver?"

"No, no, Bessy; I didn't mean justly the mole; I meant it to stand for summat else; but niver
mind--it's puzzling work, talking is. What I'm thinking on, is how to find the right sort o'
school to send Tom to, for I might be ta'en in again, as I've been wi' th' academy. I'll have
nothing to do wi' a 'cademy again: whativer school I send Tom to, it sha'n't be a 'cademy;
it shall be a place where the lads spend their time i' summat else besides blacking the family's
shoes, and getting up the potatoes. It's an uncommon puzzling thing to know what school to pick."

Mr. Tulliver paused a minute or two, and dived with both hands into his breeches pockets as
if he hoped to find some suggestion there. Apparently he was not disappointed, for he presently
said, "I know what I'll do: I'll talk it over wi' Riley; he's coming to-morrow, t' arbitrate
about the dam."

"Well, Mr. Tulliver, I've put the sheets out for the best bed, and Kezia's got 'em hanging
at the fire. They aren't the best sheets, but they're good enough for anybody to sleep in,
be he who he will; for as for them best Holland sheets, I should repent buying 'em, only they'll
do to lay us out in. An' if you was to die to-morrow, Mr. Tulliver, they're mangled beautiful,
an' all ready, an' smell o' lavender as it 'ud be a pleasure to lay 'em out; an' they lie at
the left-hand corner o' the big oak linen-chest at the back: not as I should trust anybody
to look 'em out but myself."

As Mrs. Tulliver uttered the last sentence, she drew a bright bunch of keys from her pocket,
and singled out one, rubbing her thumb and finger up and down it with a placid smile while
she looked at the clear fire. If Mr. Tulliver had been a susceptible man in his conjugal relation,
he might have supposed that she drew out the key to aid her imagination in anticipating the
moment when he would be in a state to justify the production of the best Holland sheets. Happily
he was not so; he was only susceptible in respect of his right to water-power; moreover, he
had the marital habit of not listening very closely, and since his mention of Mr. Riley, had
been apparently occupied in a tactile examination of his woollen stockings.

"I think I've hit it, Bessy," was his first remark after a short silence. "Riley's as likely
a man as any to know o' some school; he's had schooling himself, an' goes about to all sorts
o' places, arbitratin' and vallyin' and that. And we shall have time to talk it over to-morrow
night when the business is done. I want Tom to be such a sort o' man as Riley, you know,--as
can talk pretty nigh as well as if it was all wrote out for him, and knows a good lot o' words
as don't mean much, so as you can't lay hold of 'em i' law; and a good solid knowledge o' business
too."

"Well," said Mrs. Tulliver, "so far as talking proper, and knowing everything, and walking
with a bend in his back, and setting his hair up, I shouldn't mind the lad being brought up
to that. But them fine-talking men from the big towns mostly wear the false shirt-fronts; they
wear a frill till it's all a mess, and then hide it with a bib; I know Riley does. And then,
if Tom's to go and live at Mudport, like Riley, he'll have a house with a kitchen hardly big
enough to turn in, an' niver get a fresh egg for his breakfast, an' sleep up three pair o'
stairs,--or four, for what I know,--and be burnt to death before he can get down."

"No, no," said Mr. Tulliver, "I've no thoughts of his going to Mudport: I mean him to set up
his office at St. Ogg's, close by us, an' live at home. But," continued Mr. Tulliver after
a pause, "what I'm a bit afraid on is, as Tom hasn't got the right sort o' brains for a smart
fellow. I doubt he's a bit slowish. He takes after your family, Bessy."

"Yes, that he does," said Mrs. Tulliver, accepting the last proposition entirely on its own
merits; "he's wonderful for liking a deal o' salt in his broth. That was my brother's way,
and my father's before him."

"It seems a bit a pity, though," said Mr. Tulliver, "as the lad should take after the mother's
side instead o' the little wench. That's the worst on't wi' crossing o' breeds: you can never
justly calkilate what'll come on't. The little un takes after my side, now: she's twice as
'cute as Tom. Too 'cute for a woman, I'm afraid," continued Mr. Tulliver, turning his head
dubiously first on one side and then on the other. "It's no mischief much while she's a little
un; but an over-'cute woman's no better nor a long-tailed sheep,--she'll fetch none the bigger
price for that."

"Yes, it is a mischief while she's a little un, Mr. Tulliver, for it runs to naughtiness. How
to keep her in a clean pinafore two hours together passes my cunning. An' now you put me i'
mind," continued Mrs. Tulliver, rising and going to the window, "I don't know where she is
now, an' it's pretty nigh tea-time. Ah, I thought so,--wanderin' up an' down by the water,
like a wild thing: She'll tumble in some day."

Mrs. Tulliver rapped the window sharply, beckoned, and shook her head,--a process which she
repeated more than once before she returned to her chair.

"You talk o' 'cuteness, Mr. Tulliver," she observed as she sat down, "but I'm sure the child's
half an idiot i' some things; for if I send her upstairs to fetch anything, she forgets what
she's gone for, an' perhaps 'ull sit down on the floor i' the sunshine an' plait her hair an'
sing to herself like a Bedlam creatur', all the while I'm waiting for her downstairs. That
niver run i' my family, thank God! no more nor a brown skin as makes her look like a mulatter.
I don't like to fly i' the face o' Providence, but it seems hard as I should have but one gell,
an' her so comical."

"Pooh, nonsense!" said Mr. Tulliver; "she's a straight, black-eyed wench as anybody need wish
to see. I don't know i' what she's behind other folks's children; and she can read almost as
well as the parson."

"But her hair won't curl all I can do with it, and she's so franzy about having it put i' paper,
and I've such work as never was to make her stand and have it pinched with th' irons."

"Cut it off--cut it off short," said the father, rashly.

"How can you talk so, Mr. Tulliver? She's too big a gell--gone nine, and tall of her age--to
have her hair cut short; an' there's her cousin Lucy's got a row o' curls round her head, an'
not a hair out o' place. It seems hard as my sister Deane should have that pretty child; I'm
sure Lucy takes more after me nor my own child does. Maggie, Maggie," continued the mother,
in a tone of half-coaxing fretfulness, as this small mistake of nature entered the room, "where's
the use o' my telling you to keep away from the water? You'll tumble in and be drownded some
day, an' then you'll be sorry you didn't do as mother told you."

Maggie's hair, as she threw off her bonnet, painfully confirmed her mother's accusation. Mrs.
Tulliver, desiring her daughter to have a curled crop, "like other folks's children," had had
it cut too short in front to be pushed behind the ears; and as it was usually straight an hour
after it had been taken out of paper, Maggie was incessantly tossing her head to keep the dark,
heavy locks out of her gleaming black eyes,--an action which gave her very much the air of
a small Shetland pony.

"Oh, dear, oh, dear, Maggie, what are you thinkin'of, to throw your bonnet down there? Take
it upstairs, there's a good gell, an' let your hair be brushed, an' put your other pinafore
on, an' change your shoes, do, for shame; an' come an' go on with your patchwork, like a little
lady."

"Oh, mother," said Maggie, in a vehemently cross tone, "I don't want to do my patchwork."

"What! not your pretty patchwork, to make a counterpane for your aunt Glegg?"

"It's foolish work," said Maggie, with a toss of her mane,--"tearing things to pieces to sew
'em together again. And I don't want to do anything for my aunt Glegg. I don't like her."

Exit Maggie, dragging her bonnet by the string, while Mr. Tulliver laughs audibly.

"I wonder at you, as you'll laugh at her, Mr. Tulliver," said the mother, with feeble fretfulness
in her tone. "You encourage her i' naughtiness. An' her aunts will have it as it's me spoils her."

Mrs. Tulliver was what is called a good-tempered person,--never cried, when she was a baby,
on any slighter ground than hunger and pins; and from the cradle upward had been healthy, fair,
plump, and dull-witted; in short, the flower of her family for beauty and amiability. But milk
and mildness are not the best things for keeping, and when they turn only a little sour, they
may disagree with young stomachs seriously. I have often wondered whether those early Madonnas
of Raphael, with the blond faces and somewhat stupid expression, kept their placidity undisturbed
when their strong-limbed, strong-willed boys got a little too old to do without clothing. I
think they must have been given to feeble remonstrance, getting more and more peevish as it
became more and more ineffectual.

Chapter III

Mr. Riley Gives His Advice Concerning a School for Tom

The gentleman in the ample white cravat and shirt-frill, taking his brandy-and-water so pleasantly
with his good friend Tulliver, is Mr. Riley, a gentleman with a waxen complexion and fat hands,
rather highly educated for an auctioneer and appraiser, but large-hearted enough to show a
great deal of bonhomie toward simple country acquaintances of hospitable habits. Mr. Riley
spoke of such acquaintances kindly as "people of the old school."

The conversation had come to a pause. Mr. Tulliver, not without a particular reason, had abstained
from a seventh recital of the cool retort by which Riley had shown himself too many for Dix,
and how Wakem had had his comb cut for once in his life, now the business of the dam had been
settled by arbitration, and how there never would have been any dispute at all about the height
of water if everybody was what they should be, and Old Harry hadn't made the lawyers.

Mr. Tulliver was, on the whole, a man of safe traditional opinions; but on one or two points
he had trusted to his unassisted intellect, and had arrived at several questionable conclusions;
amongst the rest, that rats, weevils, and lawyers were created by Old Harry. Unhappily he had
no one to tell him that this was rampant Manichæism, else he might have seen his error. But
to-day it was clear that the good principle was triumphant: this affair of the water-power
had been a tangled business somehow, for all it seemed--look at it one way--as plain as water's
water; but, big a puzzle as it was, it hadn't got the better of Riley. Mr. Tulliver took his
brandy-and-water a little stronger than usual, and, for a man who might be supposed to have
a few hundreds lying idle at his banker's, was rather incautiously open in expressing his high
estimate of his friend's business talents.

But the dam was a subject of conversation that would keep; it could always be taken up again
at the same point, and exactly in the same condition; and there was another subject, as you
know, on which Mr. Tulliver was in pressing want of Mr. Riley's advice. This was his particular
reason for remaining silent for a short space after his last draught, and rubbing his knees
in a meditative manner. He was not a man to make an abrupt transition. This was a puzzling
world, as he often said, and if you drive your wagon in a hurry, you may light on an awkward
corner. Mr. Riley, meanwhile, was not impatient. Why should he be? Even Hotspur, one would
think, must have been patient in his slippers on a warm hearth, taking copious snuff, and sipping
gratuitous brandy-and-water.

"There's a thing I've got i' my head," said Mr. Tulliver at last, in rather a lower tone than
usual, as he turned his head and looked steadfastly at his companion.

"Ah!" said Mr. Riley, in a tone of mild interest. He was a man with heavy waxen eyelids and
high-arched eyebrows, looking exactly the same under all circumstances. This immovability of
face, and the habit of taking a pinch of snuff before he gave an answer, made him trebly oracular
to Mr. Tulliver.

"It's a very particular thing," he went on; "it's about my boy Tom."

At the sound of this name, Maggie, who was seated on a low stool close by the fire, with a
large book open on her lap, shook her heavy hair back and looked up eagerly. There were few
sounds that roused Maggie when she was dreaming over her book, but Tom's name served as well
as the shrillest whistle; in an instant she was on the watch, with gleaming eyes, like a Skye
terrier suspecting mischief, or at all events determined to fly at any one who threatened it
toward Tom.

"You see, I want to put him to a new school at Midsummer," said Mr. Tulliver; "he's comin'
away from the 'cademy at Lady-day, an' I shall let him run loose for a quarter; but after that
I want to send him to a downright good school, where they'll make a scholard of him."

"Well," said Mr. Riley, "there's no greater advantage you can give him than a good education.
Not," he added, with polite significance,--"not that a man can't be an excellent miller and
farmer, and a shrewd, sensible fellow into the bargain, without much help from the schoolmaster."

"I believe you," said Mr. Tulliver, winking, and turning his head on one side; "but that's
where it is. I don't mean Tom to be a miller and farmer. I see no fun i' that. Why, if I made
him a miller an' farmer, he'd be expectin' to take to the mill an' the land, an' a-hinting
at me as it was time for me to lay by an' think o' my latter end. Nay, nay, I've seen enough
o' that wi' sons. I'll never pull my coat off before I go to bed. I shall give Tom an eddication
an' put him to a business, as he may make a nest for himself, an' not want to push me out o'
mine. Pretty well if he gets it when I'm dead an' gone. I sha'n't be put off wi' spoon-meat
afore I've lost my teeth."

This was evidently a point on which Mr. Tulliver felt strongly; and the impetus which had given
unusual rapidity and emphasis to his speech showed itself still unexhausted for some minutes
afterward in a defiant motion of the head from side to side, and an occasional "Nay, nay,"
like a subsiding growl.

These angry symptoms were keenly observed by Maggie, and cut her to the quick. Tom, it appeared,
was supposed capable of turning his father out of doors, and of making the future in some way
tragic by his wickedness. This was not to be borne; and Maggie jumped up from her stool, forgetting
all about her heavy book, which fell with a bang within the fender, and going up between her
father's knees, said, in a half-crying, half-indignant voice,--

"Father, Tom wouldn't be naughty to you ever; I know he wouldn't."

Mrs. Tulliver was out of the room superintending a choice supper-dish, and Mr. Tulliver's heart
was touched; so Maggie was not scolded about the book. Mr. Riley quietly picked it up and looked
at it, while the father laughed, with a certain tenderness in his hard-lined face, and patted
his little girl on the back, and then held her hands and kept her between his knees.

"What! they mustn't say any harm o' Tom, eh?" said Mr. Tulliver, looking at Maggie with a twinkling
eye. Then, in a lower voice, turning to Mr. Riley, as though Maggie couldn't hear, "She understands
what one's talking about so as never was. And you should hear her read,--straight off, as if
she knowed it all beforehand. And allays at her book! But it's bad--it's bad," Mr. Tulliver
added sadly, checking this blamable exultation. "A woman's no business wi' being so clever;
it'll turn to trouble, I doubt. But bless you!"--here the exultation was clearly recovering
the mastery,--"she'll read the books and understand 'em better nor half the folks as are growed
up."

Maggie's cheeks began to flush with triumphant excitement. She thought Mr. Riley would have
a respect for her now; it had been evident that he thought nothing of her before.

Mr. Riley was turning over the leaves of the book, and she could make nothing of his face,
with its high-arched eyebrows; but he presently looked at her, and said,--

"Come, come and tell me something about this book; here are some pictures,--I want to know
what they mean."

Maggie, with deepening color, went without hesitation to Mr. Riley's elbow and looked over
the book, eagerly seizing one corner, and tossing back her mane, while she said,--

"Oh, I'll tell you what that means. It's a dreadful picture, isn't it? But I can't help looking
at it. That old woman in the water's a witch,--they've put her in to find out whether she's
a witch or no; and if she swims she's a witch, and if she's drowned--and killed, you know--she's
innocent, and not a witch, but only a poor silly old woman. But what good would it do her then,
you know, when she was drowned? Only, I suppose, she'd go to heaven, and God would make it
up to her. And this dreadful blacksmith with his arms akimbo, laughing,--oh, isn't he ugly?--I'll
tell you what he is. He's the Devil really" (here Maggie's voice became louder and more emphatic),
"and not a right blacksmith; for the Devil takes the shape of wicked men, and walks about and
sets people doing wicked things, and he's oftener in the shape of a bad man than any other,
because, you know, if people saw he was the Devil, and he roared at 'em, they'd run away, and
he couldn't make 'em do what he pleased."

Mr. Tulliver had listened to this exposition of Maggie's with petrifying wonder.

"Why, what book is it the wench has got hold on?" he burst out at last.

"The 'History of the Devil,' by Daniel Defoe,--not quite the right book for a little girl,"
said Mr. Riley. "How came it among your books, Mr. Tulliver?"

Maggie looked hurt and discouraged, while her father said,--

"Why, it's one o' the books I bought at Partridge's sale. They was all bound alike,--it's a
good binding, you see,--and I thought they'd be all good books. There's Jeremy Taylor's 'Holy
Living and Dying' among 'em. I read in it often of a Sunday" (Mr. Tulliver felt somehow a familiarity
with that great writer, because his name was Jeremy); "and there's a lot more of 'em,--sermons
mostly, I think,--but they've all got the same covers, and I thought they were all o' one sample,
as you may say. But it seems one mustn't judge by th' outside. This is a puzzlin' world."

"Well," said Mr. Riley, in an admonitory, patronizing tone as he patted Maggie on the head,
"I advise you to put by the 'History of the Devil,' and read some prettier book. Have you no
prettier books?"

"Oh, yes," said Maggie, reviving a little in the desire to vindicate the variety of her reading.
"I know the reading in this book isn't pretty; but I like the pictures, and I make stories
to the pictures out of my own head, you know. But I've got 'Æsop's Fables,' and a book about
Kangaroos and things, and the 'Pilgrim's Progress.'"

"Ah, a beautiful book," said Mr. Riley; "you can't read a better."

"Well, but there's a great deal about the Devil in that," said Maggie, triumphantly, "and I'll
show you the picture of him in his true shape, as he fought with Christian."

Maggie ran in an instant to the corner of the room, jumped on a chair, and reached down from
the small bookcase a shabby old copy of Bunyan, which opened at once, without the least trouble
of search, at the picture she wanted.

"Here he is," she said, running back to Mr. Riley, "and Tom colored him for me with his paints
when he was at home last holidays,--the body all black, you know, and the eyes red, like fire,
because he's all fire inside, and it shines out at his eyes."

"Go, go!" said Mr. Tulliver, peremptorily, beginning to feel rather uncomfortable at these
free remarks on the personal appearance of a being powerful enough to create lawyers; "shut
up the book, and let's hear no more o' such talk. It is as I thought--the child 'ull learn
more mischief nor good wi' the books. Go, go and see after your mother."

Maggie shut up the book at once, with a sense of disgrace, but not being inclined to see after
her mother, she compromised the matter by going into a dark corner behind her father's chair,
and nursing her doll, toward which she had an occasional fit of fondness in Tom's absence,
neglecting its toilet, but lavishing so many warm kisses on it that the waxen cheeks had a
wasted, unhealthy appearance.

"Did you ever hear the like on't?" said Mr. Tulliver, as Maggie retired. "It's a pity but what
she'd been the lad,--she'd ha' been a match for the lawyers, she would. It's the wonderful'st
thing"--here he lowered his voice--"as I picked the mother because she wasn't o'er 'cute--bein'
a good-looking woman too, an' come of a rare family for managing; but I picked her from her
sisters o' purpose, 'cause she was a bit weak like; for I wasn't agoin' to be told the rights
o' things by my own fireside. But you see when a man's got brains himself, there's no knowing
where they'll run to; an' a pleasant sort o' soft woman may go on breeding you stupid lads
and 'cute wenches, till it's like as if the world was turned topsy-turvy. It's an uncommon
puzzlin' thing."

Mr. Riley's gravity gave way, and he shook a little under the application of his pinch of snuff
before he said,--

"But your lad's not stupid, is he? I saw him, when I was here last, busy making fishing-tackle;
he seemed quite up to it."

"Well, he isn't not to say stupid,--he's got a notion o' things out o' door, an' a sort o'
common sense, as he'd lay hold o' things by the right handle. But he's slow with his tongue,
you see, and he reads but poorly, and can't abide the books, and spells all wrong, they tell
me, an' as shy as can be wi' strangers, an' you never hear him say 'cute things like the little
wench. Now, what I want is to send him to a school where they'll make him a bit nimble with
his tongue and his pen, and make a smart chap of him. I want my son to be even wi' these fellows
as have got the start o' me with having better schooling. Not but what, if the world had been
left as God made it, I could ha' seen my way, and held my own wi' the best of 'em; but things
have got so twisted round and wrapped up i' unreasonable words, as aren't a bit like 'em, as
I'm clean at fault, often an' often. Everything winds about so--the more straightforrad you
are, the more you're puzzled."

Mr. Tulliver took a draught, swallowed it slowly, and shook his head in a melancholy manner,
conscious of exemplifying the truth that a perfectly sane intellect is hardly at home in this
insane world.

"You're quite in the right of it, Tulliver," observed Mr. Riley. "Better spend an extra hundred
or two on your son's education, than leave it him in your will. I know I should have tried
to do so by a son of mine, if I'd had one, though, God knows, I haven't your ready money to
play with, Tulliver; and I have a houseful of daughters into the bargain."

"I dare say, now, you know of a school as 'ud be just the thing for Tom," said Mr. Tulliver,
not diverted from his purpose by any sympathy with Mr. Riley's deficiency of ready cash.

Mr. Riley took a pinch of snuff, and kept Mr. Tulliver in suspense by a silence that seemed
deliberative, before he said,--

"I know of a very fine chance for any one that's got the necessary money and that's what you
have, Tulliver. The fact is, I wouldn't recommend any friend of mine to send a boy to a regular
school, if he could afford to do better. But if any one wanted his boy to get superior instruction
and training, where he would be the companion of his master, and that master a first rate fellow,
I know his man. I wouldn't mention the chance to everybody, because I don't think everybody
would succeed in getting it, if he were to try; but I mention it to you, Tulliver, between
ourselves."

The fixed inquiring glance with which Mr. Tulliver had been watching his friend's oracular
face became quite eager.

"Ay, now, let's hear," he said, adjusting himself in his chair with the complacency of a person
who is thought worthy of important communications.

"He's an Oxford man," said Mr. Riley, sententiously, shutting his mouth close, and looking
at Mr. Tulliver to observe the effect of this stimulating information.

"What! a parson?" said Mr. Tulliver, rather doubtfully.

"Yes, and an M.A. The bishop, I understand, thinks very highly of him: why, it was the bishop
who got him his present curacy."

"Ah?" said Mr. Tulliver, to whom one thing was as wonderful as another concerning these unfamiliar
phenomena. "But what can he want wi' Tom, then?"

"Why, the fact is, he's fond of teaching, and wishes to keep up his studies, and a clergyman
has but little opportunity for that in his parochial duties. He's willing to take one or two
boys as pupils to fill up his time profitably. The boys would be quite of the family,--the
finest thing in the world for them; under Stelling's eye continually."

"But do you think they'd give the poor lad twice o' pudding?" said Mrs. Tulliver, who was now
in her place again. "He's such a boy for pudding as never was; an' a growing boy like that,--it's
dreadful to think o' their stintin' him."

"And what money 'ud he want?" said Mr. Tulliver, whose instinct told him that the services
of this admirable M.A. would bear a high price.

"Why, I know of a clergyman who asks a hundred and fifty with his youngest pupils, and he's
not to be mentioned with Stelling, the man I speak of. I know, on good authority, that one
of the chief people at Oxford said, Stelling might get the highest honors if he chose. But
he didn't care about university honors; he's a quiet man--not noisy."

"Ah, a deal better--a deal better," said Mr. Tulliver; "but a hundred and fifty's an uncommon
price. I never thought o' paying so much as that."

"A good education, let me tell you, Tulliver,--a good education is cheap at the money. But
Stelling is moderate in his terms; he's not a grasping man. I've no doubt he'd take your boy
at a hundred, and that's what you wouldn't get many other clergymen to do. I'll write to him
about it, if you like."

Mr. Tulliver rubbed his knees, and looked at the carpet in a meditative manner.

"But belike he's a bachelor," observed Mrs. Tulliver, in the interval; "an' I've no opinion
o' housekeepers. There was my brother, as is dead an' gone, had a housekeeper once, an' she
took half the feathers out o' the best bed, an' packed 'em up an' sent 'em away. An' it's unknown
the linen she made away with--Stott her name was. It 'ud break my heart to send Tom where there's
a housekeeper, an' I hope you won't think of it, Mr. Tulliver."

"You may set your mind at rest on that score, Mrs. Tulliver," said Mr. Riley, "for Stelling
is married to as nice a little woman as any man need wish for a wife. There isn't a kinder
little soul in the world; I know her family well. She has very much your complexion,--light
curly hair. She comes of a good Mudport family, and it's not every offer that would have been
acceptable in that quarter. But Stelling's not an every-day man; rather a particular fellow
as to the people he chooses to be connected with. But I think he would have no objection to
take your son; I think he would not, on my representation."

"I don't know what he could have against the lad," said Mrs. Tulliver, with a slight touch
of motherly indignation; "a nice fresh-skinned lad as anybody need wish to see."

"But there's one thing I'm thinking on," said Mr. Tulliver, turning his head on one side and
looking at Mr. Riley, after a long perusal of the carpet. "Wouldn't a parson be almost too
high-learnt to bring up a lad to be a man o' business? My notion o' the parsons was as they'd
got a sort o' learning as lay mostly out o' sight. And that isn't what I want for Tom. I want
him to know figures, and write like print, and see into things quick, and know what folks mean,
and how to wrap things up in words as aren't actionable. It's an uncommon fine thing, that
is," concluded Mr. Tulliver, shaking his head, "when you can let a man know what you think
of him without paying for it."

"Oh, my dear Tulliver," said Mr. Riley, "you're quite under a mistake about the clergy; all
the best schoolmasters are of the clergy. The schoolmasters who are not clergymen are a very
low set of men generally."

"Ay, that Jacobs is, at the 'cademy," interposed Mr. Tulliver.

"To be sure,--men who have failed in other trades, most likely. Now, a clergyman is a gentleman
by profession and education; and besides that, he has the knowledge that will ground a boy,
and prepare him for entering on any career with credit. There may be some clergymen who are
mere bookmen; but you may depend upon it, Stelling is not one of them,--a man that's wide awake,
let me tell you. Drop him a hint, and that's enough. You talk of figures, now; you have only
to say to Stelling, 'I want my son to be a thorough arithmetician,' and you may leave the rest
to him."

Mr. Riley paused a moment, while Mr. Tulliver, some-what reassured as to clerical tutorship,
was inwardly rehearsing to an imaginary Mr. Stelling the statement, "I want my son to know
'rethmetic."

"You see, my dear Tulliver," Mr. Riley continued, "when you get a thoroughly educated man,
like Stelling, he's at no loss to take up any branch of instruction. When a workman knows the
use of his tools, he can make a door as well as a window."

"Ay, that's true," said Mr. Tulliver, almost convinced now that the clergy must be the best
of schoolmasters.

"Well, I'll tell you what I'll do for you," said Mr. Riley, "and I wouldn't do it for everybody.
I'll see Stelling's father-in-law, or drop him a line when I get back to Mudport, to say that
you wish to place your boy with his son-in-law, and I dare say Stelling will write to you,
and send you his terms."

"But there's no hurry, is there?" said Mrs. Tulliver; "for I hope, Mr. Tulliver, you won't
let Tom begin at his new school before Midsummer. He began at the 'cademy at the Lady-day quarter,
and you see what good's come of it."

"Ay, ay, Bessy, never brew wi' bad malt upo' Michael-masday, else you'll have a poor tap,"
said Mr. Tulliver, winking and smiling at Mr. Riley, with the natural pride of a man who has
a buxom wife conspicuously his inferior in intellect. "But it's true there's no hurry; you've
hit it there, Bessy."

"It might be as well not to defer the arrangement too long," said Mr. Riley, quietly, "for
Stelling may have propositions from other parties, and I know he would not take more than two
or three boarders, if so many. If I were you, I think I would enter on the subject with Stelling
at once: there's no necessity for sending the boy before Midsummer, but I would be on the safe
side, and make sure that nobody forestalls you."

"Ay, there's summat in that," said Mr. Tulliver.

"Father," broke in Maggie, who had stolen unperceived to her father's elbow again, listening
with parted lips, while she held her doll topsy-turvy, and crushed its nose against the wood
of the chair,--"father, is it a long way off where Tom is to go? Sha'n't we ever go to see him?"

"I don't know, my wench," said the father, tenderly. "Ask Mr. Riley; he knows."

Maggie came round promptly in front of Mr. Riley, and said, "How far is it, please, sir?"

"Oh, a long, long way off," that gentleman answered, being of opinion that children, when they
are not naughty, should always be spoken to jocosely. "You must borrow the seven-leagued boots
to get to him."

"That's nonsense!" said Maggie, tossing her head haughtily, and turning away, with the tears
springing in her eyes. She began to dislike Mr. Riley; it was evident he thought her silly
and of no consequence.

"Hush, Maggie! for shame of you, asking questions and chattering," said her mother. "Come and
sit down on your little stool, and hold your tongue, do. But," added Mrs. Tulliver, who had
her own alarm awakened, "is it so far off as I couldn't wash him and mend him?"

"About fifteen miles; that's all," said Mr. Riley. "You can drive there and back in a day quite
comfortably. Or--Stelling is a hospitable, pleasant man--he'd be glad to have you stay."

"But it's too far off for the linen, I doubt," said Mrs. Tulliver, sadly.

The entrance of supper opportunely adjourned this difficulty, and relieved Mr. Riley from the
labor of suggesting some solution or compromise,--a labor which he would otherwise doubtless
have undertaken; for, as you perceive, he was a man of very obliging manners. And he had really
given himself the trouble of recommending Mr. Stelling to his friend Tulliver without any positive
expectation of a solid, definite advantage resulting to himself, notwithstanding the subtle
indications to the contrary which might have misled a too-sagacious observer. For there is
nothing more widely misleading than sagacity if it happens to get on a wrong scent; and sagacity,
persuaded that men usually act and speak from distinct motives, with a consciously proposed
end in view, is certain to waste its energies on imaginary game.

Plotting covetousness and deliberate contrivance, in order to compass a selfish end, are nowhere
abundant but in the world of the dramatist: they demand too intense a mental action for many
of our fellow-parishioners to be guilty of them. It is easy enough to spoil the lives of our
neighbors without taking so much trouble; we can do it by lazy acquiescence and lazy omission,
by trivial falsities for which we hardly know a reason, by small frauds neutralized by small
extravagances, by maladroit flatteries, and clumsily improvised insinuations. We live from
hand to mouth, most of us, with a small family of immediate desires; we do little else than
snatch a morsel to satisfy the hungry brood, rarely thinking of seed-corn or the next year's crop.

Mr. Riley was a man of business, and not cold toward his own interest, yet even he was more
under the influence of small promptings than of far-sighted designs. He had no private understanding
with the Rev. Walter Stelling; on the contrary, he knew very little of that M.A. and his acquirements,--not
quite enough, perhaps, to warrant so strong a recommendation of him as he had given to his
friend Tulliver. But he believed Mr. Stelling to be an excellent classic, for Gadsby had said
so, and Gadsby's first cousin was an Oxford tutor; which was better ground for the belief even
than his own immediate observation would have been, for though Mr. Riley had received a tincture
of the classics at the great Mudport Free School, and had a sense of understanding Latin generally,
his comprehension of any particular Latin was not ready. Doubtless there remained a subtle
aroma from his juvenile contact with the "De Senectute" and the fourth book of the "Æneid,"
but it had ceased to be distinctly recognizable as classical, and was only perceived in the
higher finish and force of his auctioneering style. Then, Stelling was an Oxford man, and the
Oxford men were always--no, no, it was the Cambridge men who were always good mathematicians.
But a man who had had a university education could teach anything he liked; especially a man
like Stelling, who had made a speech at a Mudport dinner on a political occasion, and had acquitted
himself so well that it was generally remarked, this son-in-law of Timpson's was a sharp fellow.
It was to be expected of a Mudport man, from the parish of St. Ursula, that he would not omit
to do a good turn to a son-in-law of Timpson's, for Timpson was one of the most useful and
influential men in the parish, and had a good deal of business, which he knew how to put into
the right hands. Mr. Riley liked such men, quite apart from any money which might be diverted,
through their good judgment, from less worthy pockets into his own; and it would be a satisfaction
to him to say to Timpson on his return home, "I've secured a good pupil for your son-in-law."
Timpson had a large family of daughters; Mr. Riley felt for him; besides, Louisa Timpson's
face, with its light curls, had been a familiar object to him over the pew wainscot on a Sunday
for nearly fifteen years; it was natural her husband should be a commendable tutor. Moreover,
Mr. Riley knew of no other schoolmaster whom he had any ground for recommending in preference;
why, then, should be not recommend Stelling? His friend Tulliver had asked him for an opinion;
it is always chilling, in friendly intercourse, to say you have no opinion to give. And if
you deliver an opinion at all, it is mere stupidity not to do it with an air of conviction
and well-founded knowledge. You make it your own in uttering it, and naturally get fond of
it. Thus Mr. Riley, knowing no harm of Stelling to begin with, and wishing him well, so far
as he had any wishes at all concerning him, had no sooner recommended him than he began to
think with admiration of a man recommended on such high authority, and would soon have gathered
so warm an interest on the subject, that if Mr. Tulliver had in the end declined to send Tom
to Stelling, Mr. Riley would have thought his "friend of the old school" a thoroughly pig-headed
fellow.

If you blame Mr. Riley very severely for giving a recommendation on such slight grounds, I
must say you are rather hard upon him. Why should an auctioneer and appraiser thirty years
ago, who had as good as forgotten his free-school Latin, be expected to manifest a delicate
scrupulosity which is not always exhibited by gentlemen of the learned professions, even in
our present advanced stage of morality?

Besides, a man with the milk of human kindness in him can scarcely abstain from doing a good-natured
action, and one cannot be good-natured all round. Nature herself occasionally quarters an inconvenient
parasite on an animal toward whom she has otherwise no ill will. What then? We admire her care
for the parasite. If Mr. Riley had shrunk from giving a recommendation that was not based on
valid evidence, he would not have helped Mr. Stelling to a paying pupil, and that would not
have been so well for the reverend gentleman. Consider, too, that all the pleasant little dim
ideas and complacencies--of standing well with Timpson, of dispensing advice when he was asked
for it, of impressing his friend Tulliver with additional respect, of saying something, and
saying it emphatically, with other inappreciably minute ingredients that went along with the
warm hearth and the brandy-and-water to make up Mr. Riley's consciousness on this occasion--would
have been a mere blank. The spiders were especially a subject of speculation with her. She
wondered if they had any relatives outside the mill, for in that case there must be a painful
difficulty in their family intercourse,--a fat and floury spider, accustomed to take his fly
well dusted with meal, must suffer a little at a cousin's table where the fly was au naturel,
and the lady spiders must be mutually shocked at each other's appearance. But the part of the
mill she liked best was the topmost story,--the corn-hutch, where there were the great heaps
of grain, which she could sit on and slide down continually.

"Oh dear, Luke," said Maggie, in a piteous tone, while the big tears rolled down her cheek;
"Tom told me to take care of 'em, and I forgot. What shall I do?"

"Well, you see, Miss, they were in that far tool-house, an' it was nobody's business to see
to 'em. I reckon Master Tom told Harry to feed 'em, but there's no countin' on Harry; he's
an offal creatur as iver come about the primises, he is. He remembers nothing but his own inside--an'
I wish it'ud gripe him." Mrs. Moggs, Luke's wife, was a decidely agreeable acquaintance. She
exhibited her hospitality in bread and treacle, and possessed various works of art. Maggie
actually forgot that she had any special cause of sadness this morning, as she stood on a chair
to look at a remarkable series of pictures representing the Prodigal Son in the costume of
Sir Charles Grandison, except that, as might have been expected from his defective moral character,
he had not, like that accomplished hero, the taste and strength of mind to dispense with a
wig. But the indefinable weight the dead rabbits had left on her mind caused her to feel more
than usual pity for the career of this weak young man, particularly when she looked at the
picture where he leaned against a tree with a flaccid appearance, his knee-breeches unbuttoned
and his wig awry, while the swine apparently of some foreign breed, seemed to insult him by
their good spirits over their feast of husks.

"I'm very glad his father took him back again, aren't you, Luke?" she said. "For he was very
sorry, you know, and wouldn't do wrong again."

"Eh, Miss," said Luke, "he'd be no great shakes, I doubt, let's feyther do what he would for him."

That was a painful thought to Maggie, and she wished much that the subsequent history of the
young man had not been left a blank. "You forgot to feed 'em, then, and Harry forgot?" he said,
his color heightening for a moment, but soon subsiding. "I'll pitch into Harry. I'll have him
turned away. And I don't love you, Maggie. You sha'n't go fishing with me to-morrow.

Chapter VI

The Aunts and Uncles Are Coming

It was Easter week, and Mrs. Tulliver's cheesecakes were more exquisitely light than usual.
"A puff o' wind 'ud make 'em blow about like feathers," Kezia the housemaid said, feeling proud
to live under a mistress who could make such pastry; so that no season or circumstances could
have been more propitious for a family party, even if it had not been advisable to consult
sister Glegg and sister Pullet about Tom's going to school.

"I'd as lief not invite sister Deane this time," said Mrs. Tulliver, "for she's as jealous
and having as can be, and's allays trying to make the worst o' my poor children to their aunts
and uncles."

"Yes, yes," said Mr. Tulliver, "ask her to come. I never hardly get a bit o' talk with Deane
now; we haven't had him this six months. What's it matter what she says? My children need be
beholding to nobody."

"That's what you allays say, Mr. Tulliver; but I'm sure there's nobody o' your side, neither
aunt nor uncle, to leave 'em so much as a five-pound note for a leggicy. And there's sister
Glegg, and sister Pullet too, saving money unknown, for they put by all their own interest
and butter-money too; their husbands buy 'em everything." Mrs. Tulliver was a mild woman, but
even a sheep will face about a little when she has lambs.

"Tchuh!" said Mr. Tulliver. "It takes a big loaf when there's many to breakfast. What signifies
your sisters' bits o' money when they've got half-a-dozen nevvies and nieces to divide it among?
And your sister Deane won't get 'em to leave all to one, I reckon, and make the country cry
shame on 'em when they are dead?"

"I don't know what she won't get 'em to do," said Mrs. Tulliver, "for my children are so awk'ard
wi' their aunts and uncles. Maggie's ten times naughtier when they come than she is other days,
and Tom doesn't like 'em, bless him!--though it's more nat'ral in a boy than a gell. And there's
Lucy Dean's such a good child,--you may set her on a stool, and there she'llsit for an hour
together, and never offer to get off. I can't help loving the child as if she was my own; and
I'm sure she's more like my child than sister Deane's, for she'd allays a very poor color for
one of our family, sister Deane had."

"Well, well, if you're fond o' the child, ask her father and mother to bring her with 'em.
And won't you ask their aunt and uncle Moss too, and some o' their children?"

"Oh, dear, Mr. Tulliver, why, there'd be eight people besides the children, and I must put
two more leaves i' the table, besides reaching down more o' the dinner-service; and you know
as well as I do as my sisters and your sister don't suit well together."

"Well, well, do as you like, Bessy," said Mr. Tulliver, taking up his hat and walking out to
the mill. Few wives were more submissive than Mrs. Tulliver on all points unconnected with
her family relations; but she had been a Miss Dodson, and the Dodsons were a very respectable
family indeed,--as much looked up to as any in their own parish, or the next to it. The Miss
Dodsons had always been thought to hold up their heads very high, and no one was surprised
the two eldest had married so well,--not at an early age, for that was not the practice of
the Dodson family. There were particular ways of doing everything in that family: particular
ways of bleaching the linen, of making the cowslip wine, curing the hams, and keeping the bottled
gooseberries; so that no daughter of that house could be indifferent to the privilege of having
been born a Dodson, rather than a Gibson or a Watson. Funerals were always conducted with peculiar
propriety in the Dodson family: the hat-bands were never of a blue shade, the gloves never
split at the thumb, everybody was a mourner who ought to be, and there were always scarfs for
the bearers. When one of the family was in trouble or sickness, all the rest went to visit
the unfortunate member, usually at the same time, and did not shrink from uttering the most
disagreeable truths that correct family feeling dictated; if the illness or trouble was the
sufferer's own fault, it was not in the practice of the Dodson family to shrink from saying
so. In short, there was in this family a peculiar tradition as to what was the right thing
in household management and social demeanor, and the only bitter circumstance attending this
superiority was a painful inability to approve the condiments or the conduct of families ungoverned
by the Dodson tradition. A female Dodson, when in "strange houses," always ate dry bread with
her tea, and declined any sort of preserves, having no confidence in the butter, and thinking
that the preserves had probably begun to ferment from want of due sugar and boiling. There
were some Dodsons less like the family than others, that was admitted; but in so far as they
were "kin," they were of necessity better than those who were "no kin." And it is remarkable
that while no individual Dodson was satisfied with any other individual Dodson, each was satisfied,
not only with him or her self, but with the Dodsons collectively. The feeblest member of a
family--the one who has the least character--is often the merest epitome of the family habits
and traditions; and Mrs. Tulliver was a thorough Dodson, though a mild one, as small-beer,
so long as it is anything, is only describable as very weak ale: and though she had groaned
a little in her youth under the yoke of her elder sisters, and still shed occasional tears
at their sisterly reproaches, it was not in Mrs. Tulliver to be an innovator on the family
ideas. She was thankful to have been a Dodson, and to have one child who took after her own
family, at least in his features and complexion, in liking salt and in eating beans, which
a Tulliver never did.

In other respects the true Dodson was partly latent in Tom, and he was as far from appreciating
his "kin" on the mother's side as Maggie herself, generally absconding for the day with a large
supply of the most portable food, when he received timely warning that his aunts and uncles
were coming,--a moral symptom from which his aunt Glegg deduced the gloomiest views of his
future. It was rather hard on Maggie that Tom always absconded without letting her into the
secret, but the weaker sex are acknowledged to be serious impedimenta in cases of flight.

"Why, Tom? Because Lucy's coming?" He always takes the best bit, if you don't punch him for
it; and if you choose the best with your eyes shut, he changes his hands. Maggie felt sure
that Bob was wicked, without very distinctly knowing why; unless it was because Bob's mother
was a dreadfully large fat woman, who lived at a queer round house down the river; and once,
when Maggie and Tom had wandered thither, there rushed out a brindled dog that wouldn't stop
barking; and when Bob's mother came out after it, and screamed above the barking to tell them
not to be frightened, Maggie thought she was scolding them fiercely, and her heart beat with
terror. Maggie thought it very likely that the round house had snakes on the floor, and bats
in the bedroom; for she had seen Bob take off his cap to show Tom a little snake that was inside
it, and another time he had a handful of young bats: altogether, he was an irregular character,
perhaps even slightly diabolical, judging from his intimacy with snakes and bats; and to crown
all, when Tom had Bob for a companion, he didn't mind about Maggie, and would never let her
go with him.

It must be owned that Tom was fond of Bob's company. How could it be otherwise? Bob knew, directly
he saw a bird's egg, whether it was a swallow's, or a tomtit's, or a yellow-hammer's; he found
out all the wasps' nests, and could set all sort of traps; he could climb the trees like a
squirrel, and had quite a magical power of detecting hedgehogs and stoats; and he had courage
to do things that were rather naughty, such as making gaps in the hedgerows, throwing stones
after the sheep, and killing a cat that was wandering incognito.

Such qualities in an inferior, who could always be treated with authority in spite of his superior
knowingness, had necessarily a fatal fascination for Tom; and every holiday-time Maggie was
sure to have days of grief because he had gone off with Bob.

Maggie's was a troublous life, and this was the form in which she took her opium.

Meanwhile Tom, forgetting all about Maggie and the sting of reproach which he had left in her
heart, was hurrying along with Bob, whom he had met accidentally, to the scene of a great rat-catching
in a neighboring barn. Bob knew all about this particular affair, and spoke of the sport with
an enthusiasm which no one who is not either divested of all manly feeling, or pitiably ignorant
of rat-catching, can fail to imagine. For a person suspected of preternatural wickedness, Bob
was really not so very villanous-looking; there was even something agreeable in his snub-nosed
face, with its close-curled border of red hair. But then his trousers were always rolled up
at the knee, for the convenience of wading on the slightest notice; and his virtue, supposing
it to exist, was undeniably "virtue in rags," which, on the authority even of bilious philosophers,
who think all well-dressed merit overpaid, is notoriously likely to remain unrecognized (perhaps
because it is seen so seldom).

"I know the chap as owns the ferrets," said Bob, in a hoarse treble voice, as he shuffled along,
keeping his blue eyes fixed on the river, like an amphibious animal who foresaw occasion for
darting in. "He lives up the Kennel Yard at Sut Ogg's, he does. He's the biggest rot-catcher
anywhere, he is. I'd sooner, be a rot-catcher nor anything, I would. The moles is nothing to
the rots. But Lors! you mun ha' ferrets. Dogs is no good. Why, there's that dog, now!" Bob
continued, pointing with an air of disgust toward Yap, "he's no more good wi' a rot nor nothin'.
I see it myself, I did, at the rot-catchin' i' your feyther's barn."

Yap, feeling the withering influence of this scorn, tucked his tail in and shrank close to
Tom's leg, who felt a little hurt for him, but had not the superhuman courage to seem behindhand
with Bob in contempt for a dog who made so poor a figure.

"No, no," he said, "Yap's no good at sport. I'll have regular good dogs for rats and everything,
when I've done school."

"Hev ferrets, Measter Tom," said Bob, eagerly,--"them white ferrets wi' pink eyes; Lors, you
might catch your own rots, an' you might put a rot in a cage wi' a ferret, an' see 'em fight,
you might. That's what I'd do, I know, an' it 'ud be better fun a'most nor seein' two chaps
fight,--if it wasn't them chaps as sold cakes an' oranges at the Fair, as the things flew out
o' their baskets, an' some o' the cakes was smashed--But they tasted just as good," added Bob,
by way of note or addendum, after a moment's pause.

"But, I say, Bob," said Tom, in a tone of deliberation, "ferrets are nasty biting things,--they'll
bite a fellow without being set on."

"Lors! why that's the beauty on 'em. If a chap lays hold o' your ferret, he won't be long before
he hollows out a good un, he won't."

At this moment a striking incident made the boys pause suddenly in their walk. It was the plunging
of some small body in the water from among the neighboring bulrushes; if it was not a water-rat,
Bob intimated that he was ready to undergo the most unpleasant consequences.

"Hoigh! Yap,--hoigh! there he is," said Tom, clapping his hands, as the little black snout
made its arrowy course to the opposite bank. "Seize him, lad! seize him!"

Yap agitated his ears and wrinkled his brows, but declined to plunge, trying whether barking
would not answer the purpose just as well.

"Ugh! you coward!" said Tom, and kicked him over, feeling humiliated as a sportsman to possess
so poor-spirited an animal. Bob abstained from remark and passed on, choosing, however, to
walk in the shallow edge of the overflowing river by way of change.

"He's none so full now, the Floss isn't," said Bob, as he kicked the water up before him, with
an agreeable sense of being insolent to it. "Why, last 'ear, the meadows was all one sheet
o' water, they was."

"Ay, but," said Tom, whose mind was prone to see an opposition between statements that were
really accordant,--"but there was a big flood once, when the Round Pool was made. I know there
was, 'cause father says so. And the sheep and cows all drowned, and the boats went all over
the fields ever such a way."

"I don't care about a flood comin'," said Bob; "I don't mind the water, no more nor the land.
I'd swim, I would."

"Ah, but if you got nothing to eat for ever so long?" said Tom, his imagination becoming quite
active under the stimulus of that dread. "When I'm a man, I shall make a boat with a wooden
house on the top of it, like Noah's ark, and keep plenty to eat in it,--rabbits and things,--all
ready. And then if the flood came, you know, Bob, I shouldn't mind. And I'd take you in, if
I saw you swimming," he added, in the tone of a benevolent patron.

"I aren't frighted," said Bob, to whom hunger did not appear so appalling. "But I'd get in
an' knock the rabbits on th' head when you wanted to eat 'em."

"Ah, and I should have halfpence, and we'd play at heads-and-tails," said Tom, not contemplating
the possibility that this recreation might have fewer charms for his mature age. "I'd divide
fair to begin with, and then we'd see who'd win."

"I've got a halfpenny o' my own," said Bob, proudly, coming out of the water and tossing his
halfpenny in the air. "Yeads or tails?"

"Tails," said Tom, instantly fired with the desire to win.

"It's yeads," said Bob, hastily, snatching up the halfpenny as it fell.

"It wasn't," said Tom, loudly and peremptorily. "You give me the halfpenny; I've won it fair."

"I sha'n't," said Bob, holding it tight in his pocket.

"Then I'll make you; see if I don't," said Tom.

"Yes, I can."

"You can't make me do nothing, you can't," said Bob.

"No, you can't."

"I'm master."

"I don't care for you."

"But I'll make you care, you cheat," said Tom, collaring Bob and shaking him.

"You get out wi' you," said Bob, giving Tom a kick.

Tom's blood was thoroughly up: he went at Bob with a lunge and threw him down, but Bob seized
hold and kept it like a cat, and pulled Tom down after him. But it is not urged as a necessity,
when they say it cannot be, that the flame passes over to the heart through their room (stanza
e cortile) and courtyard leaving so many waters behind, for two reasons.

First, because such an impediment cannot exist in action, if (equally?) violent opposition is not
put into action;[U] second, because in so far as the waters are actually
in the eyes, they can give passage to the heat as to the light; for,
experience proves that the luminous ray kindles, by means of reflection,
any material that becomes opposed to it, without heating the glass;
and the ray passes through a glass, crystal or other vase, full of
water, and heats an object placed under it, without heating the thick
intervening body.

As it is also true that it causes dry and dusty impressions in the caves of the deep sea. Therefore
by analogy, if not by the same sort of reasons, we may see how it is possible that, through the
lubricant and dark passage of the eyes, the affection may be kindled and inflamed by that light,
the which for the same reason cannot be in the middle.[V] As the light of the sun, according to other
reasoning, is in the middle air, or again in the nearer sense, and again in the common sense,
or again in the intellect, notwithstanding that from one mode proceeds the other mode of being.

[U]
Prima, per che tal impedimento in atto non puo essere se non posti in atto tali oltraggiosi ripari.
Does this mean that the opposites which are called into action must be equal in power?--(Translator.)

If,
when fire is ascending again to its proper sphere, it should meet
with obstacles, such as a bit of wood or of straw, it would resume
its former activity, and consume this obstacle or hindrance; and the
greater the resistance, the more its activity would be increased....
You will observe that the obstacle which the fire meets with would
serve only to increase its velocity, by giving it a new ardour to
overcome all obstacles in joining itself to its centre.--("Spiritual
Torrents," Lady Guion.)

[V] Nel mezzo.

LAO. Are there any more discourses?

LIB.

Yes; because both the one and the other are trying to find out in what way it is that it (the
heart) contains so many flames and those (the eyes) so many waters. The heart then makes the next
proposition.

59.

Second proposition of the heart to the eyes.

If to the foaming sea the rivers run, And pour their streams into
the sea's dark gulf, How does the kingdom of the water-gods, Fed by
the double torrent of these eyes, Increase not; since the earth Must
lose the glorious overflow?

How is it that we do not see the day, When from the mount Deukalion returns? Where are the
lengthening shores, Where is the torrent to put out my flame, Or, failing this, to give it greater
power? Does drop of water ever fall to earth In such a way as leads
me to suppose It is not as the senses show it?

It asks, what power is this, which is not put into action? If the waters are so many, why does
Neptune not come to tyrannize over the kingdoms of the other elements?

Where are the inundated banks? Where is he who will give coolness to the ardent fire? Where is the
drop of water by which I may affirm through the eyes that which the senses deny? But the eyes in
the same way ask another question.

60.

Second proposition of the eyes to the heart.

If matter changed and turned to fire acquires The movement of a lighter element, Rising aloft
unto the highest heaven; Wherefore, ignited by the fire of love, Swifter than wind, dost thou
not rise and flash. Into the sun and be incorporate there? Why rather stay a pilgrim here
below Than open through the air and us a way? No spark of fire from that heart Goes out through
the wide atmosphere. Body of dust and ashes is not seen, Nor water-laden smoke ascends on high.
All is contained entire within itself, And not of flame, is reason, sense, or thought.

LAO. This proposition is neither more nor less conclusive than the other. But let us come at once
to the answers if there be any.

LIC. There are some certainly and full of sap. Listen.

61.

Second response of the heart to the eyes.

He is a fool, who that alone believes, Which to the sense appears,
who reason scorns.

My flame could never wing its way above.

The conflagration infinite remains unseen. Between the eyes their waters are contained, One
infinite encroaches not upon another. Nature wills not that all should perish. If so much fire's
enough for so much sphere, Say, say, oh eyes, What shall we do? how act In order to make known, or
I, or you, For its deliverance, the sad plight of the soul? If one and other of us both be hid,
How can we move the beauteous god to pity?

LAS. If it is not true it is very well imagined: if it is not so, it is yet a very good excuse
the one for the other; because where there are two forces, of the which one is not greater
than the other, the operation of both must cease, for one resists as much as the other insists,
and one assails while the other defends. If therefore the sea is infinite and the force of tears
in the eyes is immense, it never can be made apparent by speech, nor the impetus of the fire concealed
in the heart break forth, nor can they (the eyes) send forth the twin torrent to the sea if the
heart shelters them with equal tenacity. Therefore the beautiful deity cannot be expected
to be pitiful towards the afflicted soul because of the exhibition of tears which distil from
the eyes, or speech which breaks forth from the breast.

LIB. Now note the answer of the eyes to this proposition:--

62.

Second response of the eyes to the heart.

Alas! we poured into the wavy sea, The strength of our two founts in vain, For two opposing powers
hold it concealed, Lest it go rolling aimlessly adown. The strength unmeasured of the burning
heart, Withholds a passage to the lofty streams; Barring their twofold course unto the sea,
Nature abhors the covered ground.[W] Now say, afflicted heart, what canst thou bring To oppose
against us with an equal force? Oh, where is he, will boast himself to be Exalted by this most
unhappy love, If of thy pain and mine it can be said, The greater they, the less it may be seen.

[W]
Ch'il coperto terren natura aborre.

Both these evils being infinite, like two equally vigorous opposites they curb and suppress each
other: it could not be so if they were both finite, seeing that a
precise equality does not belong to natural things, nor would it be
so if the one were finite, the other infinite; for of a certainty
the one would absorb the other, and they would both be seen, or, at
least one, through the other.

Beneath these sentences, there lies hidden, ethical and natural philosophy, and I leave it to be
searched for, meditated upon and understood, by whosoever will and can. This alone I will not leave
(unsaid) that it is not without reason that the affection of the
heart is said to be the infinite sea by the apprehension of the eyes.[X]
For the object of the mind being infinite, and no definite object
being proposed to the intellect, the will cannot be satisfied by a
finite good, but if besides that, something else is found, it is desired
and sought for; for, as is commonly said, the apex of the inferior
species is the beginning of the superior species, whether the degrees
are taken according to the forms, the which we cannot consider as
being infinite, or according to the modes and reasons of those, in
which way, the highest good being infinite, it would be supposed to
be infinitely communicated, according to the condition of the things,
over which it is diffused.

However, there is no definite species of the universe. I speak according to the figure and
mass; there is no definite species of the intellect; the affections are not a definite species.

[X]
Fire, Flame, Day, Smoke, Night, and so on ... These are all names of various deities which preside
over the Cosmo-psychic Powers.--("The Secret Doctrine.")

LAO. These two powers of the soul, then, never are nor can be perfect for the object, if they
refer to it infinitely?

LIB. So it would be if this infinite were by negative privation or privative negation of the end,
as it is for a more positive affirmation of the end, infinite and
endless.[Y]

[Y] "The deity is one, because it is infinite.

It is triple, because it is ever manifesting." This manifestation is triple in its aspects,
for it requires, as Aristotle has it, three principles for every natural body to become objective:
privation, form and matter. Privation meant in the mind of the great philosopher ... the lowest
plane and world of the Anima Mundi.--("The Secret Doctrine.")

LAO.

You mean, then, two kinds of affinity; the one privative, the which may be towards something
which is power, as, infinite is darkness, the end of which is the position of light; the other
perfecting, which tends to the act and perfection, as infinite is the light, the end of which
would be privation and darkness.[Z] In this, then, the intellect conceives the light, the good, the
beautiful, in so far as the horizon of its capacity extends, and the soul, which drinks of Divine
nectar and the fountain of eternal life in so far as its own vessel allows, and one sees that
the light is beyond the circumference of his horizon, where it can go and penetrate more and more,
and the nectar and fount of living water is infinitely fruitful, so that it can become ever more
and more intoxicated.

[Z] "Darkness adopted illumination in order to make itself visible." Darkness in its radical, metaphysical
basis, is subjective and absolute light; while the latter, in all its seeming effulgence and
glory, is merely a mass of shadows, as it can never be eternal, and is simply an illusion,
or Maya.--("The Secret Doctrine.")

LIB. From this it does not follow that there is imperfection in the object, nor that there is little
satisfaction in the potency, but that the power is included in the
object and beatifically absorbed by it.

Here the eyes imprint upon the heart, that is upon the intelligence, and rouse in the will an
infinite torment of love, where there is no pain because nothing is sought which is not obtained;
but it is happiness, because that which is there sought is always found, and there is no satiety,
inasmuch as there is always appetite, and therefore enjoyment; in
this it is not like the food of the body, the which with satiety loses
enjoyment, has no pleasure before the enjoyment, nor after enjoyment,
but only in the enjoyment itself, and where it passes certain limits
it comes to feel annoyance and disgust.

Behold, then, in a certain analogy, how the highest good ought to be also infinite, in order
that it should not some time turn to evil; as food, which is good for the body, if it is not
limited, may come to be poison.

Thus it is that the water of the ocean does not extinguish that flame, and the rigour of the Arctic circle
does not mitigate that ardour.

Therefore it is bad through (the) one hand, which holds him and rejects him; it holds him, because
it has him for its own; it rejects him because, flying from him, the higher it makes itself
the more he ascends upwards to it; the more he follows it, the further off it appears, by
reason of its high excellence, according as it is said: Accedit homo
ad cor altum, et exaltabitur Deus.

Such blessedness of affection begins in this life, and in this state it has its mode of being.
Hence the heart can say that it is within with the body, and without with the sun, in so far as
the soul with its twin faculty, puts into operation two functions:
the one to vivify and realize the animal body, the other to contemplate
superior things; so that it is in receptive potentiality from above,
as it is in re-active potentiality below, towards the body.

The body is, as it were, dead, and as it were apart from the soul, the which is its life and
its perfection; and the soul is as it were dead, and a thing apart from the superior illuminating
intelligence, from which the intellect is derived as to its nature and acts. Therefore, the heart
is said to be the beginning of life, and not to be alive, it is said to belong to the animating
soul, and that this does not belong to it; because it is inflamed by Divine love, and finally
converted into fire, which can set on fire that which comes near it, seeing that it has contracted
into itself the divinity; it is made god, and consequently in its kind it can inspire others
with love; as the splendour of the sun may be seen and admired in
the moon.

And as for that which belongs to the consideration of the eyes, know, that in the present discourse
they have two functions; one to impress the heart, the other to receive the impression of the
heart; as this also has two functions, one to receive the impressions from the eyes, the other
to impress them. The eyes study the species and propose them to the heart; the heart desires them,
and presents his desire to the eyes; these conceive the light, diffuse it, and kindle the fire
in the heart, which heated and kindled, sends its waters (umore) to them, so that they may
dispose of them[AA] (digeriscano). Thus, firstly, cognition moves the affection, and soon the
affection moves the cognition. The eyes, when they move (the heart), are dry, because they
perform the office of a looking-glass, and of a representer; when they are moved, however, they
become troubled and perturbed, because they perform the office of a diligent executer, seeing
that with the speculating intellect, the beautiful and the good is first seen, then the will
desires it; and later the industrious intellect procures it, follows it, and seeks it. Tearful
eyes signify the difficulty of separating the thing wished for from, the wisher, the which in
order that it should not pall, nor disgust, presents itself as an infinite longing (studio) which
ever has, and ever seeks; seeing that the delight of the gods is ascribed to drinking, not to
having tasted ambrosia, and to the continual enjoyment of food and drink, and not in being
satiated and without desire for them.

Hence they have satiety as it were in movement and apprehension, not in quiet and comprehension;
they are not satiated without appetite, nor are they in a state of desire, without being in
a certain way satiated.

[AA] "Deity is an arcane, living (or moving) FIRE, and the eternal witnesses to this unseen Presence
are Light, Heat, Moisture," this trinity including, and being the
cause of every phenomenon in Nature.--("The Secret Doctrine.")

LAO.

Esuries satiata, satietas esuriens.

LIB. Precisely so.

LAO: From this I can comprehend how, without blame, but with great truth and understanding, it has been
said that Divine love weeps with indescribable groans, because having
all it loves all, and loving all has all.

LIB.

But many comments would be necessary if we would understand that Divine love which is deity
itself; and one easily understands Divine love, so far as it is to
be found in its effects and in the inferior nature.

I do not say that which from the divinity is diffused into things, but that of things which aspires
to the divinity.

LAO. Now of this and of other matters we will discourse more at our ease presently. Let us go.

=Fourth
Dialogue=.

Interlocutors:

SEVERINO. MINUTOLO.

SEV. You will see the origin of the nine blind men, who state nine reasons and special causes
of their blindness, and yet they all agree in one general reason and one common enthusiasm.[AB]

[AB]
May one suggest an analogy between the nine months of gestation,
during which time the foetus goes through various stages and conditions
to complete the "individual cycle of evolution," and the nine blind
men who, at the end of their probation, are brought to see the light--to
be born--illuminated?--("Translator.")

MIN.

Begin with the first!

SEV. The first of these, notwithstanding that he is blind by nature, yet he laments, saying to
the others that he cannot persuade himself that nature has been less courteous to them than
to him; seeing that although they do not (now) see, yet they have
enjoyed sight, and have had experience of that sense, and of the value
of that faculty, of which they have been deprived, while he came into
the world as a mole, to be seen and not to see, to long for the sight
of that which he never had seen.

MIN. Many have fallen in love through report alone.

SEV. They have, says he, the happiness of retaining that Divine image present in the mind,
so that, although blind, they have in imagination that which he cannot have. Then in the sistine
he turns to his guide and begs him to lead him to some precipice, so that he may no longer endure
this contempt and persecution of nature. He says then:

63.

The first blind man.

Ye now afflicted are, who erst were glad, For ye have lost the light that once was yours, Yet
happy, for ye have the twin lights known. These eyes ne'er lighted were, and ne'er were quenched;
But a more grievous destiny is mine Which calls for heavier lamentation. Who will deny that
nature upon me Has frowned more harshly than on you? Conduct me to the precipice, my guide,
And give me peace, for there will I a cure For this my dolour and affliction find; For to be seen,
yet not to see the light, Like an incapable and sightless mole, Is to be useless and a burden
on the earth.

Now follows the other, who, bitten by the serpent of jealousy, became affected in the organ of
sight. He wanders without any guide, unless he has jealousy for his
escort.

He begs some of the bystanders, that seeing there is no remedy for his misfortune, they should
have pity upon him, so that he should no longer feel it; that he
might become as unmanifest to himself as he is to the light, and that
they bury him together with his own misfortune.

He says then:

64.

The second blind man.

Alecta has torn from out her dreadful hair, The infernal worm that with a cruel bite, Has fiercely
fastened on my soul, And of my senses, torn the chief away, Leaving the intellect without its
guide. In vain the soul some consolation seeks. That spiteful, rabid, rancorous jealousy Makes
me go stumbling along the way. If neither magic spell nor sacred plant, Nor virtue hid in the
enchanter's stone, Will yield me the deliverance that I ask: Let one of you, my friends, be
pitiful, And put me out, as are put out my eyes, That they and I together be entombed.

The other follows, who says that he became blind through having been suddenly brought out of
the darkness into a great light: accustomed to behold ordinary beauties, a celestial beauty
was suddenly presented before his eyes--a sun-god--in this manner his sight became dull and the
twin lights which shine at the prow of the soul were put out: for the eyes are like two beacons,
which guide the ship, and this would happen to one brought up in Cimmerian obscurity if he
fixed his eyes suddenly upon the sun. In the sistine he begs for
free passage to Hades, because darkness alone is suitable to a dark
condition. He says:

65.

The third blind man.

If sudden on the sight,
the star of day Should shed his beams on one in darkness reared, Nurtured
beneath the black Cimmerian sky, Far from the radiance of the glorious
sun, The double light, the beacon of the soul He quenches: then as
a foe he hides. Thus were my eyes made dull, inept, Used only, wonted
beauties to behold. Conduct me to the land where darkness reigns!
Wherefore being dead, speak I amidst the folk? A chip of Hell, why
do I mix and move Amongst the living, wherefore do I drink The hated
air, since all my pain Is due to having seen the highest good?

The
fourth blind man comes forward, not blind for the same reason as the
former one. For as that one was blinded through the sudden aspect
of the light, this one is so, from having too frequently beheld it,
or through having fixed his eyes too much upon it, so that he has
lost the sense of all other light, but he does not consider himself
to be blind through looking at that one which has blinded him: and
the same may be said of the sense of sight as of the sense of hearing,
that those whose ears are accustomed to great noises, do not hear
the lesser, as is well known of those who live near the cataracts
of the great river Nile which fall precipitously down to the plain.

MIN.
Thus, all those who have accustomed the body and the soul to things
more difficult and great, are not apt to feel annoyed by smaller difficulties.
 Of all her sisters, Mrs. Tulliver certainly preferred her sister Pullet, not
without a return of preference; but Mrs. Pullet was sorry Bessy had those naughty, awkward
children; she would do the best she could by them, but it was a pity they weren't as good and
as pretty as sister Deane's child. Maggie and Tom, on their part, thought their aunt Pullet
tolerable, chiefly because she was not their aunt Glegg. Tom always declined to go more than
once during his holidays to see either of them. Both his uncles tipped him that once, of course;
but at his aunt Pullet's there were a great many toads to pelt in the cellar-area, so that
he preferred the visit to her. Maggie shuddered at the toads, and dreamed of them horribly,
but she liked her uncle Pullet's musical snuff-box. Still, it was agreed by the sisters, in
Mrs. Tulliver's absence, that the Tulliver blood did not mix well with the Dodson blood; that,
in fact, poor Bessy's children were Tullivers, and that Tom, notwithstanding he had the Dodson
complexion, was likely to be as "contrairy" as his father. As for Maggie, she was the picture
of her aunt Moss, Mr. Tulliver's sister,--a large-boned woman, who had married as poorly as
could be; had no china, and had a husband who had much ado to pay his rent. But when Mrs. Pullet
was alone with Mrs. Tulliver upstairs, the remarks were naturally to the disadvantage of Mrs.
Glegg, and they agreed, in confidence, that there was no knowing what sort of fright sister
Jane would come out next. But their tête-à-tête was curtailed by the appearance of Mrs. Deane
with little Lucy; and Mrs. Tulliver had to look on with a silent pang while Lucy's blond curls
were adjusted. It was quite unaccountable that Mrs. Deane, the thinnest and sallowest of all
the Miss Dodsons, should have had this child, who might have been taken for Mrs. Tulliver's
any day. And Maggie always looked twice as dark as usual when she was by the side of Lucy.

She did to-day, when she and Tom came in from the garden with their father and their uncle Glegg.

"Heyday!" said aunt Glegg, with loud emphasis. "Do little boys and gells come into a room without
taking notice of their uncles and aunts? That wasn't the way when I was a little gell."

"Go and speak to your aunts and uncles, my dears," said Mrs. Tulliver, looking anxious and
melancholy. She wanted to whisper to Maggie a command to go and have her hair brushed.

"Well, and how do you do? And I hope you're good children, are you?" said Aunt Glegg, in the
same loud, emphatic way, as she took their hands, hurting them with her large rings, and kissing
their cheeks much against their desire. "Look up, Tom, look up. Boys as go to boarding-schools
should hold their heads up. Look at me now." Tom declined that pleasure apparently, for he
tried to draw his hand away. "Put your hair behind your ears, Maggie, and keep your frock on
your shoulder."

Aunt Glegg always spoke to them in this loud, emphatic way, as if she considered them deaf,
or perhaps rather idiotic; it was a means, she thought, of making them feel that they were
accountable creatures, and might be a salutary check on naughty tendencies. Bessy's children
were so spoiled--they'd need have somebody to make them feel their duty.

"Well, my dears," said aunt Pullet, in a compassionate voice, "you grow wonderful fast. I doubt
they'll outgrow their strength," she added, looking over their heads, with a melancholy expression,
at their mother. "I think the gell has too much hair. I'd have it thinned and cut shorter,
sister, if I was you; it isn't good for her health. It's that as makes her skin so brown, I
shouldn't wonder. Don't you think so, sister Deane?"

"I can't say, I'm sure, sister," said Mrs. Deane, shutting her lips close again, and looking
at Maggie with a critical eye.

"No, no," said Mr. Tulliver, "the child's healthy enough; there's nothing ails her. There's
red wheat as well as white, for that matter, and some like the dark grain best. But it 'ud
be as well if Bessy 'ud have the child's hair cut, so as it 'ud lie smooth."

A dreadful resolve was gathering in Maggie's breast, but it was arrested by the desire to know
from her aunt Deane whether she would leave Lucy behind. Aunt Deane would hardly ever let Lucy
come to see them. After various reasons for refusal, Mrs. Deane appealed to Lucy herself.

"You wouldn't like to stay behind without mother, should you, Lucy?"

"Yes, please, mother," said Lucy, timidly, blushing very pink all over her little neck.

"Well done, Lucy! Let her stay, Mrs. Deane, let her stay," said Mr. Deane, a large but alert-looking
man, with a type of physique to be seen in all ranks of English society,--bald crown, red whiskers,
full forehead, and general solidity without heaviness. You may see noblemen like Mr. Deane,
and you may see grocers or day-laborers like him; but the keenness of his brown eyes was less
common than his contour.

He held a silver snuff-box very tightly in his hand, and now and then exchanged a pinch with
Mr. Tulliver, whose box was only silver-mounted, so that it was naturally a joke between them
that Mr. Tulliver wanted to exchange snuff-boxes also. Mr. Deane's box had been given him by
the superior partners in the firm to which he belonged, at the same time that they gave him
a share in the business, in acknowledgment of his valuable services as manager. No man was
thought more highly of in St. Ogg's than Mr. Deane; and some persons were even of opinion that
Miss Susan Dodson, who was once held to have made the worst match of all the Dodson sisters,
might one day ride in a better carriage, and live in a better house, even than her sister Pullet.
There was no knowing where a man would stop, who had got his foot into a great mill-owning,
shipowning business like that of Guest & Co., with a banking concern attached. And Mrs. Deane,
as her intimate female friends observed, was proud and "having" enough; she wouldn't let her
husband stand still in the world for want of spurring. Tom never did the same sort of foolish
things as Maggie, having a wonderful instinctive discernment of what would turn to his advantage
or disadvantage; and so it happened, that though he was much more wilful and inflexible than
Maggie, his mother hardly ever called him naughty. But if Tom did make a mistake of that sort,
he espoused it, and stood by it: he "didn't mind." If he broke the lash of his father's gigwhip
by lashing the gate, he couldn't help it,--the whip shouldn't have got caught in the hinge.
If Tom Tulliver whipped a gate, he was convinced, not that the whipping of gates by all boys
was a justifiable act, but that he, Tom Tulliver, was justifiable in whipping that particular
gate, and he wasn't going to be sorry. But Maggie, as she stood crying before the glass, felt
it impossible that she should go down to dinner and endure the severe eyes and severe words
of her aunts, while Tom and Lucy, and Martha, who waited at table, and perhaps her father and
her uncles, would laugh at her; for if Tom had laughed at her, of course every one else would;
and if she had only let her hair alone, she could have sat with Tom and Lucy, and had the apricot
pudding and the custard! What could she do but sob? She sat as helpless and despairing among
her black locks as Ajax among the slaughtered sheep. Very trivial, perhaps, this anguish seems
to weather-worn mortals who have to think of Christmas bills, dead loves, and broken friendships;
but it was not less bitter to Maggie--perhaps it was even more bitter--than what we are fond
of calling antithetically the real troubles of mature life. "Ah, my child, you will have real
troubles to fret about by and by," is the consolation we have almost all of us had administered
to us in our childhood, and have repeated to other children since we have been grown up. We
have all of us sobbed so piteously, standing with tiny bare legs above our little socks, when
we lost sight of our mother or nurse in some strange place; but we can no longer recall the
poignancy of that moment and weep over it, as we do over the remembered sufferings of five
or ten years ago. Every one of those keen moments has left its trace, and lives in us still,
but such traces have blent themselves irrecoverably with the firmer texture of our youth and
manhood; and so it comes that we can look on at the troubles of our children with a smiling
disbelief in the reality of their pain. Is there any one who can recover the experience of
his childhood, not merely with a memory of what he did and what happened to him, of what he
liked and disliked when he was in frock and trousers, but with an intimate penetration, a revived
consciousness of what he felt then, when it was so long from one Midsummer to another; what
he felt when his school fellows shut him out of their game because he would pitch the ball
wrong out of mere wilfulness; or on a rainy day in the holidays, when he didn't know how to
amuse himself, and fell from idleness into mischief, from mischief into defiance, and from
defiance into sulkiness; or when his mother absolutely refused to let him have a tailed coat
that "half," although every other boy of his age had gone into tails already? Surely if we
could recall that early bitterness, and the dim guesses, the strangely perspectiveless conception
of life, that gave the bitterness its intensity, we should not pooh-pooh the griefs of our
children.

"How your husband does spoil that child, Bessy!" said Mrs. Glegg, in a loud "aside," to Mrs.
Tulliver. "It'll be the ruin of her, if you don't take care. My father never brought his children
up so, else we should ha' been a different sort o' family to what we are."

Mrs. Tulliver's domestic sorrows seemed at this moment to have reached the point at which insensibility
begins. She took no notice of her sister's remark, but threw back her capstrings and dispensed
the pudding, in mute resignation.

Mrs. Tulliver had her special reason for this permission: now the dinner was despatched, and
every one's mind disengaged, it was the right moment to communicate Mr. Tulliver's intention
concerning Tom, and it would be as well for Tom himself to be absent. The children were used
to hear themselves talked of as freely as if they were birds, and could understand nothing,
however they might stretch their necks and listen; but on this occasion Mrs. Tulliver manifested
an unusual discretion, because she had recently had evidence that the going to school to a
clergyman was a sore point with Tom, who looked at it as very much on a par with going to school
to a constable. Mrs. Tulliver had a sighing sense that her husband would do as he liked, whatever
sister Glegg said, or sister Pullet either; but at least they would not be able to say, if
the thing turned out ill, that Bessy had fallen in with her husband's folly without letting
her own friends know a word about it.

"Mr. Tulliver," she said, interrupting her husband in his talk with Mr. Deane, "it's time now
to tell the children's aunts and uncles what you're thinking of doing with Tom, isn't it?"

"Very well," said Mr. Tulliver, rather sharply, "I've no objections to tell anybody what I
mean to do with him. I've settled," he added, looking toward Mr. Glegg and Mr. Deane,--"I've
settled to send him to a Mr. Stelling, a parson, down at King's Lorton, there,--an uncommon
clever fellow, I understand, as'll put him up to most things."

There was a rustling demonstration of surprise in the company, such as you may have observed
in a country congregation when they hear an allusion to their week-day affairs from the pulpit.
It was equally astonishing to the aunts and uncles to find a parson introduced into Mr. Tulliver's
family arrangements. As for uncle Pullet, he could hardly have been more thoroughly obfuscated
if Mr. Tulliver had said that he was going to send Tom to the Lord Chancellor; for uncle Pullet
belonged to that extinct class of British yeoman who, dressed in good broadcloth, paid high
rates and taxes, went to church, and ate a particularly good dinner on Sunday, without dreaming
that the British constitution in Church and State had a traceable origin any more than the
solar system and the fixed stars.

It is melancholy, but true, that Mr. Pullet had the most confused idea of a bishop as a sort
of a baronet, who might or might not be a clergyman; and as the rector of his own parish was
a man of high family and fortune, the idea that a clergyman could be a schoolmaster was too
remote from Mr. Pullet's experience to be readily conceivable. I know it is difficult for people
in these instructed times to believe in uncle Pullet's ignorance; but let them reflect on the
remarkable results of a great natural faculty under favoring circumstances. And uncle Pullet
had a great natural faculty for ignorance. He was the first to give utterance to his astonishment.

"Why, what can you be going to send him to a parson for?" he said, with an amazed twinkling
in his eyes, looking at Mr. Glegg and Mr. Deane, to see if they showed any signs of comprehension.

"Why, because the parsons are the best schoolmasters, by what I can make out," said poor Mr.
Tulliver, who, in the maze of this puzzling world, laid hold of any clue with great readiness
and tenacity. "Jacobs at th' academy's no parson, and he's done very bad by the boy; and I
made up my mind, if I send him to school again, it should be to somebody different to Jacobs.
And this Mr. Stelling, by what I can make out, is the sort o' man I want. And I mean my boy
to go to him at Midsummer," he concluded, in a tone of decision, tapping his snuff-box and
taking a pinch.

"You'll have to pay a swinging half-yearly bill, then, eh, Tulliver? The clergymen have highish
notions, in general," said Mr. Deane, taking snuff vigorously, as he always did when wishing
to maintain a neutral position.

"What! do you think the parson'll teach him to know a good sample o' wheat when he sees it,
neighbor Tulliver?" said Mr. Glegg, who was fond of his jest, and having retired from business,
felt that it was not only allowable but becoming in him to take a playful view of things.

"Why, you see, I've got a plan i' my head about Tom," said Mr. Tulliver, pausing after that
statement and lifting up his glass.

"Well, if I may be allowed to speak, and it's seldom as I am," said Mrs. Glegg, with a tone
of bitter meaning, "I should like to know what good is to come to the boy by bringin' him up
above his fortin."

"Why," said Mr. Tulliver, not looking at Mrs. Glegg, but at the male part of his audience,
"you see, I've made up my mind not to bring Tom up to my own business. I've had my thoughts
about it all along, and I made up my mind by what I saw with Garnett and his son. I mean to
put him to some business as he can go into without capital, and I want to give him an eddication
as he'll be even wi' the lawyers and folks, and put me up to a notion now an' then."

Mrs. Glegg emitted a long sort of guttural sound with closed lips, that smiled in mingled pity
and scorn.

"It 'ud be a fine deal better for some people," she said, after that introductory note, "if
they'd let the lawyers alone."

"Is he at the head of a grammar school, then, this clergyman, such as that at Market Bewley?"
said Mr. Deane.

"No, nothing of that," said Mr. Tulliver. "He won't take more than two or three pupils, and
so he'll have the more time to attend to 'em, you know."

"Ah, and get his eddication done the sooner; they can't learn much at a time when there's so
many of 'em," said uncle Pullet, feeling that he was getting quite an insight into this difficult
matter.

"But he'll want the more pay, I doubt," said Mr. Glegg.

"Ay, ay, a cool hundred a year, that's all," said Mr. Tulliver, with some pride at his own
spirited course. "But then, you know, it's an investment; Tom's eddication 'ull be so much
capital to him."

"Ay, there's something in that," said Mr. Glegg. "Well well, neighbor Tulliver, you may be
right, you may be right:

  'When land is gone and money's spent,
  Then learning is most excellent.'

"I remember seeing those two lines wrote on a window at Buxton. But us that have got no learning
had better keep our money, eh, neighbor Pullet?" Mr. Glegg rubbed his knees, and looked very
pleasant.

"Mr. Glegg, I wonder at you," said his wife. "It's very unbecoming in a man o' your age and
belongings."

"What's unbecoming, Mrs. G.?" said Mr. Glegg, winking pleasantly at the company. "My new blue
coat as I've got on?"

"I pity your weakness, Mr. Glegg. I say it's unbecoming to be making a joke when you see your
own kin going headlongs to ruin."

"If you mean me by that," said Mr. Tulliver, considerably nettled, "you needn't trouble yourself
to fret about me. I can manage my own affairs without troubling other folks."

"Bless me!" said Mr. Deane, judiciously introducing a new idea, "why, now I come to think of
it, somebody said Wakem was going to send his son--the deformed lad--to a clergyman, didn't
they, Susan?" (appealing to his wife).

"I can give no account of it, I'm sure," said Mrs. Deane, closing her lips very tightly again.
Mrs. Deane was not a woman to take part in a scene where missiles were flying.

"Well," said Mr. Tulliver, speaking all the more cheerfully, that Mrs. Glegg might see he didn't
mind her, "if Wakem thinks o' sending his son to a clergyman, depend on it I shall make no
mistake i' sending Tom to one. Wakem's as big a scoundrel as Old Harry ever made, but he knows
the length of every man's foot he's got to deal with. Ay, ay, tell me who's Wakem's butcher,
and I'll tell you where to get your meat."

"But lawyer Wakem's son's got a hump-back," said Mrs. Pullet, who felt as if the whole business
had a funereal aspect; "it's more nat'ral to send him to a clergyman."

"Yes," said Mr. Glegg, interpreting Mrs. Pullet's observation with erroneous plausibility,
"you must consider that, neighbor Tulliver; Wakem's son isn't likely to follow any business.
Wakem 'ull make a gentleman of him, poor fellow."

"Mr. Glegg," said Mrs. G., in a tone which implied that her indignation would fizz and ooze
a little, though she was determined to keep it corked up, "you'd far better hold your tongue.
Mr. Tulliver doesn't want to know your opinion nor mine either. There's folks in the world
as know better than everybody else."

"Why, I should think that's you, if we're to trust your own tale," said Mr. Tulliver, beginning
to boil up again.

"Oh, I say nothing," said Mrs. Glegg, sarcastically. "My advice has never been asked, and I
don't give it."

"It'll be the first time, then," said Mr. Tulliver. "It's the only thing you're over-ready
at giving."

"I've been over-ready at lending, then, if I haven't been over-ready at giving," said Mrs.
Glegg. "There's folks I've lent money to, as perhaps I shall repent o' lending money to kin."

"Come, come, come," said Mr. Glegg, soothingly. But Mr. Tulliver was not to be hindered of
his retort.

"You've got a bond for it, I reckon," he said; "and you've had your five per cent, kin or no kin."

"Sister," said Mrs. Tulliver, pleadingly, "drink your wine, and let me give you some almonds
and raisins."

"Bessy, I'm sorry for you," said Mrs. Glegg, very much with the feeling of a cur that seizes
the opportunity of diverting his bark toward the man who carries no stick. "It's poor work
talking o' almonds and raisins."

"Lors, sister Glegg, don't be so quarrelsome," said Mrs. Pullet, beginning to cry a little.
"You may be struck with a fit, getting so red in the face after dinner, and we are but just
out o' mourning, all of us,--and all wi' gowns craped alike and just put by; it's very bad
among sisters."

"I should think it is bad," said Mrs. Glegg. "Things are come to a fine pass when one sister
invites the other to her house o' purpose to quarrel with her and abuse her."

"Softly, softly, Jane; be reasonable, be reasonable," said Mr. Glegg.

But while he was speaking, Mr. Tulliver, who had by no means said enough to satisfy his anger,
burst out again.

"Who wants to quarrel with you?" he said. "It's you as can't let people alone, but must be
gnawing at 'em forever. I should never want to quarrel with any woman if she kept her place."

"My place, indeed!" said Mrs. Glegg, getting rather more shrill. "There's your betters, Mr.
Tulliver, as are dead and in their grave, treated me with a different sort o' respect to what
you do; though I've got a husband as'll sit by and see me abused by them as 'ud never ha' had
the chance if there hadn't been them in our family as married worse than they might ha' done."

"If you talk o' that," said Mr. Tulliver, "my family's as good as yours, and better, for it
hasn't got a damned ill-tempered woman in it!"

"Well," said Mrs. Glegg, rising from her chair, "I don't know whether you think it's a fine
thing to sit by and hear me swore at, Mr. Glegg; but I'm not going to stay a minute longer
in this house. You can stay behind, and come home with the gig, and I'll walk home."

"Dear heart, dear heart!" said Mr. Glegg in a melancholy tone, as he followed his wife out
of the room.

"Mr. Tulliver, how could you talk so?" said Mrs. Tulliver, with the tears in her eyes.

"Let her go," said Mr. Tulliver, too hot to be damped by any amount of tears. "Let her go,
and the sooner the better; she won't be trying to domineer over me again in a hurry."

"Sister Pullet," said Mrs. Tulliver, helplessly, "do you think it 'ud be any use for you to
go after her and try to pacify her?"

"Better not, better not," said Mr. Deane. "You'll make it up another day."

"Then, sisters, shall we go and look at the children?" said Mrs. Tulliver, drying her eyes.

No proposition could have been more seasonable. Mr. Tulliver felt very much as if the air had
been cleared of obtrusive flies now the women were out of the room. There were few things he
liked better than a chat with Mr. Deane, whose close application to business allowed the pleasure
very rarely. Mr. Deane, he considered, was the "knowingest" man of his acquaintance, and he
had besides a ready causticity of tongue that made an agreeable supplement to Mr. Tulliver's
own tendency that way, which had remained in rather an inarticulate condition. And now the
women were gone, they could carry on their serious talk without frivolous interruption. They
could exchange their views concerning the Duke of Wellington, whose conduct in the Catholic
Question had thrown such an entirely new light on his character; and speak slightingly of his
conduct at the battle of Waterloo, which he would never have won if there hadn't been a great
many Englishmen at his back, not to speak of Blucher and the Prussians, who, as Mr. Tulliver
had heard from a person of particular knowledge in that matter, had come up in the very nick
of time; though here there was a slight dissidence, Mr. Deane remarking that he was not disposed
to give much credit to the Prussians,--the build of their vessels, together with the unsatisfactory
character of transactions in Dantzic beer, inclining him to form rather a low view of Prussian
pluck generally. Rather beaten on this ground, Mr. Tulliver proceeded to express his fears
that the country could never again be what it used to be; but Mr. Deane, attached to a firm
of which the returns were on the increase, naturally took a more lively view of the present,
and had some details to give concerning the state of the imports, especially in hides and spelter,
which soothed Mr. Tulliver's imagination by throwing into more distant perspective the period
when the country would become utterly the prey of Papists and Radicals, and there would be
no more chance for honest men.

Uncle Pullet sat by and listened with twinkling eyes to these high matters. He didn't understand
politics himself,--thought they were a natural gift,--but by what he could make out, this Duke
of Wellington was no better than he should be.

Chapter VIII

Mr. Tulliver Shows His Weaker Side

"Suppose sister Glegg should call her money in; it 'ud be very awkward for you to have to raise
five hundred pounds now," said Mrs. Tulliver to her husband that evening, as she took a plaintive
review of the day.

Mrs. Tulliver had lived thirteen years with her husband, yet she retained in all the freshness
of her early married life a facility of saying things which drove him in the opposite direction
to the one she desired. Some minds are wonderful for keeping their bloom in this way, as a
patriarchal goldfish apparently retains to the last its youthful illusion that it can swim
in a straight line beyond the encircling glass. Mrs. Tulliver was an amiable fish of this kind,
and after running her head against the same resisting medium for thirteen years would go at
it again to-day with undulled alacrity.

This observation of hers tended directly to convince Mr. Tulliver that it would not be at all
awkward for him to raise five hundred pounds; and when Mrs. Tulliver became rather pressing
to know how he would raise it without mortgaging the mill and the house which he had said he
never would mortgage, since nowadays people were none so ready to lend money without security,
Mr. Tulliver, getting warm, declared that Mrs. Glegg might do as she liked about calling in
her money, he should pay it in whether or not. He was not going to be beholden to his wife's
sisters. When a man had married into a family where there was a whole litter of women, he might
have plenty to put up with if he chose. But Mr. Tulliver did not choose.

Mrs. Tulliver cried a little in a trickling, quiet way as she put on her nightcap; but presently
sank into a comfortable sleep, lulled by the thought that she would talk everything over with
her sister Pullet to-morrow, when she was to take the children to Garum Firs to tea. Not that
she looked forward to any distinct issue from that talk; but it seemed impossible that past
events should be so obstinate as to remain unmodified when they were complained against.

Her husband lay awake rather longer, for he too was thinking of a visit he would pay on the
morrow; and his ideas on the subject were not of so vague and soothing a kind as those of his
amiable partner.

Mr. Tulliver, when under the influence of a strong feeling, had a promptitude in action that
may seem inconsistent with that painful sense of the complicated, puzzling nature of human
affairs under which his more dispassionate deliberations were conducted; but it is really not
improbable that there was a direct relation between these apparently contradictory phenomena,
since I have observed that for getting a strong impression that a skein is tangled there is
nothing like snatching hastily at a single thread. It was owing to this promptitude that Mr.
Tulliver was on horseback soon after dinner the next day (he was not dyspeptic) on his way
to Basset to see his sister Moss and her husband. For having made up his mind irrevocably that
he would pay Mrs. Glegg her loan of five hundred pounds, it naturally occurred to him that
he had a promissory note for three hundred pounds lent to his brother-in-law Moss; and if the
said brother-in-law could manage to pay in the money within a given time, it would go far to
lessen the fallacious air of inconvenience which Mr. Tulliver's spirited step might have worn
in the eyes of weak people who require to know precisely how a thing is to be done before they
are strongly confident that it will be easy.

For Mr. Tulliver was in a position neither new nor striking, but, like other every-day things,
sure to have a cumulative effect that will be felt in the long run: he was held to be a much
more substantial man than he really was. And as we are all apt to believe what the world believes
about us, it was his habit to think of failure and ruin with the same sort of remote pity with
which a spare, long-necked man hears that his plethoric short-necked neighbor is stricken with
apoplexy. He had been always used to hear pleasant jokes about his advantages as a man who
worked his own mill, and owned a pretty bit of land; and these jokes naturally kept up his
sense that he was a man of considerable substance. They gave a pleasant flavor to his glass
on a market-day, and if it had not been for the recurrence of half-yearly payments, Mr. Tulliver
would really have forgotten that there was a mortgage of two thousand pounds on his very desirable
freehold. That was not altogether his own fault, since one of the thousand pounds was his sister's
fortune, which he had to pay on her marriage; and a man who has neighbors that will go to law
with him is not likely to pay off his mortgages, especially if he enjoys the good opinion of
acquaintances who want to borrow a hundred pounds on security too lofty to be represented by
parchment. Our friend Mr. Tulliver had a good-natured fibre in him, and did not like to give
harsh refusals even to his sister, who had not only come in to the world in that superfluous
way characteristic of sisters, creating a necessity for mortgages, but had quite thrown herself
away in marriage, and had crowned her mistakes by having an eighth baby. On this point Mr.
Tulliver was conscious of being a little weak; but he apologized to himself by saying that
poor Gritty had been a good-looking wench before she married Moss; he would sometimes say this
even with a slight tremulousness in his voice. But this morning he was in a mood more becoming
a man of business, and in the course of his ride along the Basset lanes, with their deep ruts,--lying
so far away from a market-town that the labor of drawing produce and manure was enough to take
away the best part of the profits on such poor land as that parish was made of,--he got up
a due amount of irritation against Moss as a man without capital, who, if murrain and blight
were abroad, was sure to have his share of them, and who, the more you tried to help him out
of the mud, would sink the further in. It would do him good rather than harm, now, if he were
obliged to raise this three hundred pounds; it would make him look about him better, and not
act so foolishly about his wool this year as he did the last; in fact, Mr. Tulliver had been
too easy with his brother-in-law, and because he had let the interest run on for two years,
Moss was likely enough to think that he should never be troubled about the principal. But Mr.
Tulliver was determined not to encourage such shuffling people any longer; and a ride along
the Basset lanes was not likely to enervate a man's resolution by softening his temper. The
deep-trodden hoof-marks, made in the muddiest days of winter, gave him a shake now and then
which suggested a rash but stimulating snarl at the father of lawyers, who, whether by means
of his hoof or otherwise, had doubtless something to do with this state of the roads; and the
abundance of foul land and neglected fences that met his eye, though they made no part of his
brother Moss's farm, strongly contributed to his dissatisfaction with that unlucky agriculturist.
If this wasn't Moss's fallow, it might have been; Basset was all alike; it was a beggarly parish,
in Mr. Tulliver's opinion, and his opinion was certainly not groundless. Basset had a poor
soil, poor roads, a poor non-resident landlord, a poor non-resident vicar, and rather less
than half a curate, also poor. If any one strongly impressed with the power of the human mind
to triumph over circumstances will contend that the parishioners of Basset might nevertheless
have been a very superior class of people, I have nothing to urge against that abstract proposition;
I only know that, in point of fact, the Basset mind was in strict keeping with its circumstances.
The muddy lanes, green or clayey, that seemed to the unaccustomed eye to lead nowhere but into
each other, did really lead, with patience, to a distant high-road; but there were many feet
in Basset which they led more frequently to a centre of dissipation, spoken of formerly as
the "Markis o' Granby," but among intimates as "Dickison's." A large low room with a sanded
floor; a cold scent of tobacco, modified by undetected beer-dregs; Mr. Dickison leaning against
the door-post with a melancholy pimpled face, looking as irrelevant to the daylight as a last
night's guttered candle,--all this may not seem a very seductive form of temptation; but the
majority of men in Basset found it fatally alluring when encountered on their road toward four
o'clock on a wintry afternoon; and if any wife in Basset wished to indicate that her husband
was not a pleasure-seeking man, she could hardly do it more emphatically than by saying that
he didn't spend a shilling at Dickison's from one Whitsuntide to another. Mrs. Moss had said
so of her husband more than once, when her brother was in a mood to find fault with him, as
he certainly was to-day. And nothing could be less pacifying to Mr. Tulliver than the behavior
of the farmyard gate, which he no sooner attempted to push open with his riding-stick than
it acted as gates without the upper hinge are known to do, to the peril of shins, whether equine
or human. He was about to get down and lead his horse through the damp dirt of the hollow farmyard,
shadowed drearily by the large half-timbered buildings, up to the long line of tumble-down
dwelling-houses standing on a raised causeway; but the timely appearance of a cowboy saved
him that frustration of a plan he had determined on,--namely, not to get down from his horse
during this visit. If a man means to be hard, let him keep in his saddle and speak from that
height, above the level of pleading eyes, and with the command of a distant horizon. Mrs. Moss
heard the sound of the horse's feet, and, when her brother rode up, was already outside the
kitchen door, with a half-weary smile on her face, and a black-eyed baby in her arms. Mrs.
Moss's face bore a faded resemblance to her brother's; baby's little fat hand, pressed against
her cheek, seemed to show more strikingly that the cheek was faded.

"Brother, I'm glad to see you," she said, in an affectionate tone. "I didn't look for you to-day.
How do you do?"

"Oh, pretty well, Mrs. Moss, pretty well," answered the brother, with cool deliberation, as
if it were rather too forward of her to ask that question. She knew at once that her brother
was not in a good humor; he never called her Mrs. Moss except when he was angry, and when they
were in company. But she thought it was in the order of nature that people who were poorly
off should be snubbed. Mrs. Moss did not take her stand on the equality of the human race;
she was a patient, prolific, loving-hearted woman.

"Your husband isn't in the house, I suppose?" added Mr. Tulliver after a grave pause, during
which four children had run out, like chickens whose mother has been suddenly in eclipse behind
the hen-coop.

"No," said Mrs. Moss, "but he's only in the potato-field yonders. Georgy, run to the Far Close
in a minute, and tell father your uncle's come. You'll get down, brother, won't you, and take
something?"

"No, no; I can't get down. I must be going home again directly," said Mr. Tulliver, looking
at the distance.

"And how's Mrs. Tulliver and the children?" said Mrs. Moss, humbly, not daring to press her
invitation.

"Oh, pretty well. Tom's going to a new school at Midsummer,--a deal of expense to me. It's
bad work for me, lying out o' my money."

"I wish you'd be so good as let the children come and see their cousins some day. My little
uns want to see their cousin Maggie so as never was. And me her godmother, and so fond of her;
there's nobody 'ud make a bigger fuss with her, according to what they've got. And I know she
likes to come, for she's a loving child, and how quick and clever she is, to be sure!"

If Mrs. Moss had been one of the most astute women in the world, instead of being one of the
simplest, she could have thought of nothing more likely to propitiate her brother than this
praise of Maggie. He seldom found any one volunteering praise of "the little wench"; it was
usually left entirely to himself to insist on her merits. But Maggie always appeared in the
most amiable light at her aunt Moss's; it was her Alsatia, where she was out of the reach of
law,--if she upset anything, dirtied her shoes, or tore her frock, these things were matters
of course at her aunt Moss's. In spite of himself, Mr. Tulliver's eyes got milder, and he did
not look away from his sister as he said,--

"Ay; she's fonder o' you than o' the other aunts, I think. She takes after our family: not
a bit of her mother's in her."

"Moss says she's just like what I used to be," said Mrs. Moss, "though I was never so quick
and fond o' the books. But I think my Lizzy's like her; she's sharp. Come here, Lizzy, my dear,
and let your uncle see you; he hardly knows you, you grow so fast."

Lizzy, a black-eyed child of seven, looked very shy when her mother drew her forward, for the
small Mosses were much in awe of their uncle from Dorlcote Mill. She was inferior enough to
Maggie in fire and strength of expression to make the resemblance between the two entirely
flattering to Mr. Tulliver's fatherly love.

"Ay, they're a bit alike," he said, looking kindly at the little figure in the soiled pinafore.
"They both take after our mother. You've got enough o' gells, Gritty," he added, in a tone
half compassionate, half reproachful.

"Four of 'em, bless 'em!" said Mrs. Moss, with a sigh, stroking Lizzy's hair on each side of
her forehead; "as many as there's boys. They've got a brother apiece."

"Ah, but they must turn out and fend for themselves," said Mr. Tulliver, feeling that his severity
was relaxing and trying to brace it by throwing out a wholesome hint "They mustn't look to
hanging on their brothers."

"No; but I hope their brothers 'ull love the poor things, and remember they came o' one father
and mother; the lads 'ull never be the poorer for that," said Mrs. Moss, flashing out with
hurried timidity, like a half-smothered fire.

Mr. Tulliver gave his horse a little stroke on the flank, then checked it, and said angrily,
"Stand still with you!" much to the astonishment of that innocent animal.

"And the more there is of 'em, the more they must love one another," Mrs. Moss went on, looking
at her children with a didactic purpose. But she turned toward her brother again to say, "Not
but what I hope your boy 'ull allays be good to his sister, though there's but two of 'em,
like you and me, brother."

The arrow went straight to Mr. Tulliver's heart. He had not a rapid imagination, but the thought
of Maggie was very near to him, and he was not long in seeing his relation to his own sister
side by side with Tom's relation to Maggie. Would the little wench ever be poorly off, and
Tom rather hard upon her?

"Ay, ay, Gritty," said the miller, with a new softness in his tone; "but I've allays done what
I could for you," he added, as if vindicating himself from a reproach.

"I'm not denying that, brother, and I'm noways ungrateful," said poor Mrs. Moss, too fagged
by toil and children to have strength left for any pride. "But here's the father. What a while
you've been, Moss!"

"While, do you call it?" said Mr. Moss, feeling out of breath and injured. "I've been running
all the way. Won't you 'light, Mr. Tulliver?"

"Well, I'll just get down and have a bit o' talk with you in the garden," said Mr. Tulliver,
thinking that he should be more likely to show a due spirit of resolve if his sister were not
present.

He got down, and passed with Mr. Moss into the garden, toward an old yew-tree arbor, while
his sister stood tapping her baby on the back and looking wistfully after them.

Their entrance into the yew-tree arbor surprised several fowls that were recreating themselves
by scratching deep holes in the dusty ground, and at once took flight with much pother and
cackling. Mr. Tulliver sat down on the bench, and tapping the ground curiously here and there
with his stick, as if he suspected some hollowness, opened the conversation by observing, with
something like a snarl in his tone,--

"Why, you've got wheat again in that Corner Close, I see; and never a bit o' dressing on it.
You'll do no good with it this year."

Mr. Moss, who, when he married Miss Tulliver, had been regarded as the buck of Basset, now
wore a beard nearly a week old, and had the depressed, unexpectant air of a machine-horse.
He answered in a patient-grumbling tone, "Why, poor farmers like me must do as they can; they
must leave it to them as have got money to play with, to put half as much into the ground as
they mean to get out of it."

"I don't know who should have money to play with, if it isn't them as can borrow money without
paying interest," said Mr. Tulliver, who wished to get into a slight quarrel; it was the most
natural and easy introduction to calling in money.

"I know I'm behind with the interest," said Mr. Moss, "but I was so unlucky wi' the wool last
year; and what with the Missis being laid up so, things have gone awk'arder nor usual."

"Ay," snarled Mr. Tulliver, "there's folks as things 'ull allays go awk'ard with; empty sacks
'ull never stand upright."

"Well, I don't know what fault you've got to find wi' me, Mr. Tulliver," said Mr. Moss, deprecatingly;
"I know there isn't a day-laborer works harder."

"What's the use o' that," said Mr. Tulliver, sharply, "when a man marries, and's got no capital
to work his farm but his wife's bit o' fortin? I was against it from the first; but you'd neither
of you listen to me. And I can't lie out o' my money any longer, for I've got to pay five hundred
o' Mrs. Glegg's, and there'll be Tom an expense to me. I should find myself short, even saying
I'd got back all as is my own. You must look about and see how you can pay me the three hundred
pound."

"Well, if that's what you mean," said Mr. Moss, looking blankly before him, "we'd better be
sold up, and ha' done with it; I must part wi' every head o' stock I've got, to pay you and
the landlord too."

Poor relations are undeniably irritating,--their existence is so entirely uncalled for on our
part, and they are almost always very faulty people. Mr. Tulliver had succeeded in getting
quite as much irritated with Mr. Moss as he had desired, and he was able to say angrily, rising
from his seat,--

"Well, you must do as you can. I can't find money for everybody else as well as myself. I must
look to my own business and my own family. I can't lie out o' my money any longer. You must
raise it as quick as you can."

Mr. Tulliver walked abruptly out of the arbor as he uttered the last sentence, and, without
looking round at Mr. Moss, went on to the kitchen door, where the eldest boy was holding his
horse, and his sister was waiting in a state of wondering alarm, which was not without its
alleviations, for baby was making pleasant gurgling sounds, and performing a great deal of
finger practice on the faded face. Mrs. Moss had eight children, but could never overcome her
regret that the twins had not lived. Mr. Moss thought their removal was not without its consolations.
"Won't you come in, brother?" she said, looking anxiously at her husband, who was walking slowly
up, while Mr. Tulliver had his foot already in the stirrup.

"No, no; good-by," said he, turning his horse's head, and riding away.

No man could feel more resolute till he got outside the yard gate, and a little way along the
deep-rutted lane; but before he reached the next turning, which would take him out of sight
of the dilapidated farm-buildings, he appeared to be smitten by some sudden thought. He checked
his horse, and made it stand still in the same spot for two or three minutes, during which
he turned his head from side to side in a melancholy way, as if he were looking at some painful
object on more sides than one. Evidently, after his fit of promptitude, Mr. Tulliver was relapsing
into the sense that this is a puzzling world. He turned his horse, and rode slowly back, giving
vent to the climax of feeling which had determined this movement by saying aloud, as he struck
his horse, "Poor little wench! she'll have nobody but Tom, belike, when I'm gone."

Mr. Tulliver's return into the yard was descried by several young Mosses, who immediately ran
in with the exciting news to their mother, so that Mrs. Moss was again on the door-step when
her brother rode up. She had been crying, but was rocking baby to sleep in her arms now, and
made no ostentatious show of sorrow as her brother looked at her, but merely said:

"The father's gone to the field, again, if you want him, brother."

"No, Gritty, no," said Mr. Tulliver, in a gentle tone. "Don't you fret,--that's all,--I'll
make a shift without the money a bit, only you must be as clever and contriving as you can."

Mrs. Moss's tears came again at this unexpected kindness, and she could say nothing.

"Come, come!--the little wench shall come and see you. I'll bring her and Tom some day before
he goes to school. You mustn't fret. I'll allays be a good brother to you."

"Thank you for that word, brother," said Mrs. Moss, drying her tears; then turning to Lizzy,
she said, "Run now, and fetch the colored egg for cousin Maggie." Lizzy ran in, and quickly
reappeared with a small paper parcel.

"It's boiled hard, brother, and colored with thrums, very pretty; it was done o' purpose for
Maggie. Will you please to carry it in your pocket?"

"Ay, ay," said Mr. Tulliver, putting it carefully in his side pocket. "Good-by."

And so the respectable miller returned along the Basset lanes rather more puzzled than before
as to ways and means, but still with the sense of a danger escaped. It had come across his
mind that if he were hard upon his sister, it might somehow tend to make Tom hard upon Maggie
at some distant day, when her father was no longer there to take her part; for simple people,
like our friend Mr. Tulliver, are apt to clothe unimpeachable feelings in erroneous ideas,
and this was his confused way of explaining to himself that his love and anxiety for "the little
wench" had given him a new sensibility toward his sister.

Moreover, the preparation for a visit being always a serious affair in the Dodson family, Martha
was enjoined to have Mrs. Tulliver's room ready an hour earlier than usual, that the laying
out of the best clothes might not be deferred till the last moment, as was sometimes the case
in families of lax views, where the ribbon-strings were never rolled up, where there was little
or no wrapping in silver paper, and where the sense that the Sunday clothes could be got at
quite easily produced no shock to the mind.

Uncle Pullet had seen the expected party approaching from the window, and made haste to unbar
and unchain the front door, kept always in this fortified condition from fear of tramps, who
might be supposed to know of the glass case of stuffed birds in the hall, and to contemplate
rushing in and carrying it away on their heads. Aunt Pullet, too, appeared at the doorway,
and as soon as her sister was within hearing said, "Stop the children, for God's sake! Bessy;
don't let 'em come up the door-steps; Sally's bringing the old mat and the duster, to rub their
shoes."

Mrs. Pullet's front-door mats were by no means intended to wipe shoes on; the very scraper
had a deputy to do its dirty work. Tom rebelled particularly against this shoewiping, which
he always considered in the light of an indignity to his sex. He felt it as the beginning of
the disagreeables incident to a visit at aunt Pullet's, where he had once been compelled to
sit with towels wrapped round his boots; a fact which may serve to correct the too-hasty conclusion
that a visit to Garum Firs must have been a great treat to a young gentleman fond of animals,--fond,
that is, of throwing stones at them.

The next disagreeable was confined to his feminine companions; it was the mounting of the polished
oak stairs, which had very handsome carpets rolled up and laid by in a spare bedroom, so that
the ascent of these glossy steps might have served, in barbarous times, as a trial by ordeal
from which none but the most spotless virtue could have come off with unbroken limbs. Sophy's
weakness about these polished stairs was always a subject of bitter remonstrance on Mrs. Glegg's
part; but Mrs. Tulliver ventured on no comment, only thinking to herself it was a mercy when
she and the children were safe on the landing.

"Mrs. Gray has sent home my new bonnet, Bessy," said Mrs. Pullet, in a pathetic tone, as Mrs.
Tulliver adjusted her cap.

"Has she, sister?" said Mrs. Tulliver, with an air of much interest. "And how do you like it?"

"It's apt to make a mess with clothes, taking 'em out and putting 'em in again," said Mrs.
Pullet, drawing a bunch of keys from her pocket and looking at them earnestly, "but it 'ud
be a pity for you to go away without seeing it. There's no knowing what may happen."

Mrs. Pullet shook her head slowly at this last serious consideration, which determined her
to single out a particular key.

"I'm afraid it'll be troublesome to you getting it out, sister," said Mrs. Tulliver; "but I
should like to see what sort of a crown she's made you."

Mrs. Pullet rose with a melancholy air and unlocked one wing of a very bright wardrobe, where
you may have hastily supposed she would find a new bonnet. Not at all. Such a supposition could
only have arisen from a too-superficial acquaintance with the habits of the Dodson family.
In this wardrobe Mrs. Pullet was seeking something small enough to be hidden among layers of
linen,--it was a door-key.

"You must come with me into the best room," said Mrs. Pullet.

"May the children come too, sister?" inquired Mrs. Tulliver, who saw that Maggie and Lucy were
looking rather eager.

"Well," said aunt Pullet, reflectively, "it'll perhaps be safer for 'em to come; they'll be
touching something if we leave 'em behind."

So they went in procession along the bright and slippery corridor, dimly lighted by the semi-lunar
top of the window which rose above the closed shutter; it was really quite solemn. Aunt Pullet
paused and unlocked a door which opened on something still more solemn than the passage,--a
darkened room, in which the outer light, entering feebly, showed what looked like the corpses
of furniture in white shrouds. Everything that was not shrouded stood with its legs upward.
Lucy laid hold of Maggie's frock, and Maggie's heart beat rapidly.

Aunt Pullet half-opened the shutter and then unlocked the wardrobe, with a melancholy deliberateness
which was quite in keeping with the funereal solemnity of the scene. The delicious scent of
rose-leaves that issued from the wardrobe made the process of taking out sheet after sheet
of silver paper quite pleasant to assist at, though the sight of the bonnet at last was an
anticlimax to Maggie, who would have preferred something more strikingly preternatural. But
few things could have been more impressive to Mrs. Tulliver. She looked all round it in silence
for some moments, and then said emphatically, "Well, sister, I'll never speak against the full
crowns again!"

It was a great concession, and Mrs. Pullet felt it; she felt something was due to it.

"You'd like to see it on, sister?" she said sadly. "I'll open the shutter a bit further."

"Well, if you don't mind taking off your cap, sister," said Mrs. Tulliver.

Mrs. Pullet took off her cap, displaying the brown silk scalp with a jutting promontory of
curls which was common to the more mature and judicious women of those times, and placing the
bonnet on her head, turned slowly round, like a draper's lay-figure, that Mrs. Tulliver might
miss no point of view.

"I've sometimes thought there's a loop too much o' ribbon on this left side, sister; what do
you think?" said Mrs. Pullet.

Mrs. Tulliver looked earnestly at the point indicated, and turned her head on one side. "Well,
I think it's best as it is; if you meddled with it, sister, you might repent."

"That's true," said aunt Pullet, taking off the bonnet and looking at it contemplatively.

"How much might she charge you for that bonnet, sister?" said Mrs. Tulliver, whose mind was
actively engaged on the possibility of getting a humble imitation of this chef-d'œuvre made
from a piece of silk she had at home.

Mrs. Pullet screwed up her mouth and shook her head, and then whispered, "Pullet pays for it;
he said I was to have the best bonnet at Garum Church, let the next best be whose it would."

She began slowly to adjust the trimmings, in preparation for returning it to its place in the
wardrobe, and her thoughts seemed to have taken a melancholy turn, for she shook her head.

"Ah," she said at last, "I may never wear it twice, sister; who knows?"

"Don't talk o' that sister," answered Mrs. Tulliver. "I hope you'll have your health this summer."

"Ah! but there may come a death in the family, as there did soon after I had my green satin
bonnet. Cousin Abbott may go, and we can't think o' wearing crape less nor half a year for him."

"That would be unlucky," said Mrs. Tulliver, entering thoroughly into the possibility of an
inopportune decease. "There's never so much pleasure i' wearing a bonnet the second year, especially
when the crowns are so chancy,--never two summers alike."

"Ah, it's the way i' this world," said Mrs. Pullet, returning the bonnet to the wardrobe and
locking it up. She maintained a silence characterized by head-shaking, until they had all issued
from the solemn chamber and were in her own room again. Then, beginning to cry, she said, "Sister,
if you should never see that bonnet again till I'm dead and gone, you'll remember I showed
it you this day."

Mrs. Tulliver felt that she ought to be affected, but she was a woman of sparse tears, stout
and healthy; she couldn't cry so much as her sister Pullet did, and had often felt her deficiency
at funerals. Her effort to bring tears into her eyes issued in an odd contraction of her face.
Maggie, looking on attentively, felt that there was some painful mystery about her aunt's bonnet
which she was considered too young to understand; indignantly conscious, all the while, that
she could have understood that, as well as everything else, if she had been taken into confidence.

When they went down, uncle Pullet observed, with some acumen, that he reckoned the missis had
been showing her bonnet,--that was what had made them so long upstairs. With Tom the interval
had seemed still longer, for he had been seated in irksome constraint on the edge of a sofa
directly opposite his uncle Pullet, who regarded him with twinkling gray eyes, and occasionally
addressed him as "Young sir."

"Well, young sir, what do you learn at school?" was a standing question with uncle Pullet;
whereupon Tom always looked sheepish, rubbed his hands across his face, and answered, "I don't
know." It was altogether so embarrassing to be seated tête-à-tête with uncle Pullet, that Tom
could not even look at the prints on the walls, or the flycages, or the wonderful flower-pots;
he saw nothing but his uncle's gaiters. Not that Tom was in awe of his uncle's mental superiority;
indeed, he had made up his mind that he didn't want to be a gentleman farmer, because he shouldn't
like to be such a thin-legged, silly fellow as his uncle Pullet,--a molly-coddle, in fact.
A boy's sheepishness is by no means a sign of overmastering reverence; and while you are making
encouraging advances to him under the idea that he is overwhelmed by a sense of your age and
wisdom, ten to one he is thinking you extremely queer. The only consolation I can suggest to
you is, that the Greek boys probably thought the same of Aristotle. It is only when you have
mastered a restive horse, or thrashed a drayman, or have got a gun in your hand, that these
shy juniors feel you to be a truly admirable and enviable character. At least, I am quite sure
of Tom Tulliver's sentiments on these points. In very tender years, when he still wore a lace
border under his outdoor cap, he was often observed peeping through the bars of a gate and
making minatory gestures with his small forefinger while he scolded the sheep with an inarticulate
burr, intended to strike terror into their astonished minds; indicating thus early that desire
for mastery over the inferior animals, wild and domestic, including cockchafers, neighbors'
dogs, and small sisters, which in all ages has been an attribute of so much promise for the
fortunes of our race. Now, Mr. Pullet never rode anything taller than a low pony, and was the
least predatory of men, considering firearms dangerous, as apt to go off of themselves by nobody's
particular desire. So that Tom was not without strong reasons when, in confidential talk with
a chum, he had described uncle Pullet as a nincompoop, taking care at the same time to observe
that he was a very "rich fellow."

The only alleviating circumstance in a tête-à-tête with uncle Pullet was that he kept a variety
of lozenges and peppermint-drops about his person, and when at a loss for conversation, he
filled up the void by proposing a mutual solace of this kind.

"Do you like peppermints, young sir?" required only a tacit answer when it was accompanied
by a presentation of the article in question.

The appearance of the little girls suggested to uncle Pullet the further solace of small sweet-cakes,
of which he also kept a stock under lock and key for his own private eating on wet days; but
the three children had no sooner got the tempting delicacy between their fingers, than aunt
Pullet desired them to abstain from eating it till the tray and the plates came, since with
those crisp cakes they would make the floor "all over" crumbs. Lucy didn't mind that much,
for the cake was so pretty, she thought it was rather a pity to eat it; but Tom, watching his
opportunity while the elders were talking, hastily stowed it in his mouth at two bites, and
chewed it furtively. As for Maggie, becoming fascinated, as usual, by a print of Ulysses and
Nausicaa, which uncle Pullet had bought as a "pretty Scripture thing," she presently let fall
her cake, and in an unlucky movement crushed it beneath her foot,--a source of so much agitation
to aunt Pullet and conscious disgrace to Maggie, that she began to despair of hearing the musical
snuff-box to-day, till, after some reflection, it occurred to her that Lucy was in high favor
enough to venture on asking for a tune. So she whispered to Lucy; and Lucy, who always did
what she was desired to do, went up quietly to her uncle's knee, and blush-all over her neck
while she fingered her necklace, said, "Will you please play us a tune, uncle?"

Lucy thought it was by reason of some exceptional talent in uncle Pullet that the snuff-box
played such beautiful tunes, and indeed the thing was viewed in that light by the majority
of his neighbors in Garum. Mr. Pullet had bought the box, to begin with, and he understood
winding it up, and knew which tune it was going to play beforehand; altogether the possession
of this unique "piece of music" was a proof that Mr. Pullet's character was not of that entire
nullity which might otherwise have been attributed to it. But uncle Pullet, when entreated
to exhibit his accomplishment, never depreciated it by a too-ready consent. "We'll see about
it," was the answer he always gave, carefully abstaining from any sign of compliance till a
suitable number of minutes had passed. Uncle Pullet had a programme for all great social occasions,
and in this way fenced himself in from much painful confusion and perplexing freedom of will.

Perhaps the suspense did heighten Maggie's enjoyment when the fairy tune began; for the first
time she quite forgot that she had a load on her mind, that Tom was angry with her; and by
the time "Hush, ye pretty warbling choir," had been played, her face wore that bright look
of happiness, while she sat immovable with her hands clasped, which sometimes comforted her
mother with the sense that Maggie could look pretty now and then, in spite of her brown skin.
But when the magic music ceased, she jumped up, and running toward Tom, put her arm round his
neck and said, "Oh, Tom, isn't it pretty?"

Lest you should think it showed a revolting insensibility in Tom that he felt any new anger
toward Maggie for this uncalled-for and, to him, inexplicable caress, I must tell you that
he had his glass of cowslip wine in his hand, and that she jerked him so as to make him spill
half of it. He must have been an extreme milksop not to say angrily, "Look there, now!" especially
when his resentment was sanctioned, as it was, by general disapprobation of Maggie's behavior.

"Why don't you sit still, Maggie?" her mother said peevishly.

"Little gells mustn't come to see me if they behave in that way," said aunt Pullet.

"Why, you're too rough, little miss," said uncle Pullet.

Poor Maggie sat down again, with the music all chased out of her soul, and the seven small
demons all in again.

Mrs. Tulliver, foreseeing nothing but misbehavior while the children remained indoors, took
an early opportunity of suggesting that, now they were rested after their walk, they might
go and play out of doors; and aunt Pullet gave permission, only enjoining them not to go off
the paved walks in the garden, and if they wanted to see the poultry fed, to view them from
a distance on the horse-block; a restriction which had been imposed ever since Tom had been
found guilty of running after the peacock, with an illusory idea that fright would make one
of its feathers drop off.

Mrs. Tulliver's thoughts had been temporarily diverted from the quarrel with Mrs. Glegg by
millinery and maternal cares, but now the great theme of the bonnet was thrown into perspective,
and the children were out of the way, yesterday's anxieties recurred.

"It weighs on my mind so as never was," she said, by way of opening the subject, "sister Glegg's
leaving the house in that way. I'm sure I'd no wish t' offend a sister."

"Ah," said aunt Pullet, "there's no accounting for what Jane 'ull do. I wouldn't speak of it
out o' the family, if it wasn't to Dr. Turnbull; but it's my belief Jane lives too low. I've
said so to Pullet often and often, and he knows it."

"Why, you said so last Monday was a week, when we came away from drinking tea with 'em," said
Mr. Pullet, beginning to nurse his knee and shelter it with his pocket-hand-kerchief, as was
his way when the conversation took an interesting turn.

"Very like I did," said Mrs. Pullet, "for you remember when I said things, better than I can
remember myself. He's got a wonderful memory, Pullet has," she continued, looking pathetically
at her sister. "I should be poorly off if he was to have a stroke, for he always remembers
when I've got to take my doctor's stuff; and I'm taking three sorts now."

"There's the 'pills as before' every other night, and the new drops at eleven and four, and
the 'fervescing mixture 'when agreeable,'" rehearsed Mr. Pullet, with a punctuation determined
by a lozenge on his tongue.

"Ah, perhaps it 'ud be better for sister Glegg if she'd go to the doctor sometimes, instead
o' chewing Turkey rhubard whenever there's anything the matter with her," said Mrs. Tulliver,
who naturally saw the wide subject of medicine chiefly in relation to Mrs. Glegg.

"It's dreadful to think on," said aunt Pullet, raising her hands and letting them fall again,
"people playing with their own insides in that way! And it's flying i' the face o' Providence;
for what are the doctors for, if we aren't to call 'em in? And when folks have got the money
to pay for a doctor, it isn't respectable, as I've told Jane many a time. I'm ashamed of acquaintance
knowing it."

"Well, we've no call to be ashamed," said Mr. Pullet, "for Doctor Turnbull hasn't got such
another patient as you i' this parish, now old Mrs. Sutton's gone."

"Pullet keeps all my physic-bottles, did you know, Bessy?" said Mrs. Pullet. "He won't have
one sold. He says it's nothing but right folks should see 'em when I'm gone. They fill two
o' the long store-room shelves a'ready; but," she added, beginning to cry a little, "it's well
if they ever fill three. I may go before I've made up the dozen o' these last sizes. The pill-boxes
are in the closet in my room,--you'll remember that, sister,--but there's nothing to show for
the boluses, if it isn't the bills."

"Don't talk o' your going, sister," said Mrs. Tulliver; "I should have nobody to stand between
me and sister Glegg if you was gone. And there's nobody but you can get her to make it up with
Mr. Tulliver, for sister Deane's never o' my side, and if she was, it's not to be looked for
as she can speak like them as have got an independent fortin."

"Well, your husband is awk'ard, you know, Bessy," said Mrs. Pullet, good-naturedly ready to
use her deep depression on her sister's account as well as her own. "He's never behaved quite
so pretty to our family as he should do, and the children take after him,--the boy's very mischievous,
and runs away from his aunts and uncles, and the gell's rude and brown. It's your bad luck,
and I'm sorry for you, Bessy; for you was allays my favorite sister, and we allays liked the
same patterns."

"I know Tulliver's hasty, and says odd things," said Mrs. Tulliver, wiping away one small tear
from the corner of her eye; "but I'm sure he's never been the man, since he married me, to
object to my making the friends o' my side o' the family welcome to the house."

"I don't want to make the worst of you, Bessy," said Mrs. Pullet, compassionately, "for I doubt
you'll have trouble enough without that; and your husband's got that poor sister and her children
hanging on him,--and so given to lawing, they say. I doubt he'll leave you poorly off when
he dies. Not as I'd have it said out o' the family."

This view of her position was naturally far from cheering to Mrs. Tulliver. Her imagination
was not easily acted on, but she could not help thinking that her case was a hard one, since
it appeared that other people thought it hard.

"I'm sure, sister, I can't help myself," she said, urged by the fear lest her anticipated misfortunes
might be held retributive, to take comprehensive review of her past conduct. "There's no woman
strives more for her children; and I'm sure at scouring-time this Lady-day as I've had all
the bedhangings taken down I did as much as the two gells put together; and there's the last
elder-flower wine I've made--beautiful! I allays offer it along with the sherry, though sister
Glegg will have it I'm so extravagant; and as for liking to have my clothes tidy, and not go
a fright about the house, there's nobody in the parish can say anything against me in respect
o' backbiting and making mischief, for I don't wish anybody any harm; and nobody loses by sending
me a porkpie, for my pies are fit to show with the best o' my neighbors'; and the linen's so
in order as if I was to die to-morrow I shouldn't be ashamed. A woman can do no more nor she can."

"But it's all o' no use, you know, Bessy," said Mrs. Pullet, holding her head on one side,
and fixing her eyes pathetically on her sister, "if your husband makes away with his money.
Not but what if you was sold up, and other folks bought your furniture, it's a comfort to think
as you've kept it well rubbed. And there's the linen, with your maiden mark on, might go all
over the country. It 'ud be a sad pity for our family." Mrs. Pullet shook her head slowly.

"But what can I do, sister?" said Mrs. Tulliver. "Mr. Tulliver's not a man to be dictated to,--not
if I was to go to the parson and get by heart what I should tell my husband for the best. And
I'm sure I don't pretend to know anything about putting out money and all that. I could never
see into men's business as sister Glegg does."

"Well, you're like me in that, Bessy," said Mrs. Pullet; "and I think it 'ud be a deal more
becoming o' Jane if she'd have that pier-glass rubbed oftener,--there was ever so many spots
on it last week,--instead o' dictating to folks as have more comings in than she ever had,
and telling 'em what they're to do with their money. But Jane and me were allays contrairy;
she would have striped things, and I like spots. You like a spot too, Bessy; we allays hung
together i' that."

"Yes, Sophy," said Mrs. Tulliver, "I remember our having a blue ground with a white spot both
alike,--I've got a bit in a bed-quilt now; and if you would but go and see sister Glegg, and
persuade her to make it up with Tulliver, I should take it very kind of you. You was allays
a good sister to me."

"But the right thing 'ud be for Tulliver to go and make it up with her himself, and say he
was sorry for speaking so rash. If he's borrowed money of her, he shouldn't be above that,"
said Mrs. Pullet, whose partiality did not blind her to principles; she did not forget what
was due to people of independent fortune.

"It's no use talking o' that," said poor Mrs. Tulliver, almost peevishly. "If I was to go down
on my bare knees on the gravel to Tulliver, he'd never humble himself."

"Well, you can't expect me to persuade Jane to beg pardon," said Mrs. Pullet. "Her temper's
beyond everything; it's well if it doesn't carry her off her mind, though there never was any
of our family went to a madhouse."

"I'm not thinking of her begging pardon," said Mrs. Tulliver. "But if she'd just take no notice,
and not call her money in; as it's not so much for one sister to ask of another; time 'ud mend
things, and Tulliver 'ud forget all about it, and they'd be friends again."

Mrs. Tulliver, you perceive, was not aware of her husband's irrevocable determination to pay
in the five hundred pounds; at least such a determination exceeded her powers of belief.

"Well, Bessy," said Mrs. Pullet, mournfully, "I don't want to help you on to ruin. I won't
be behindhand i' doing you a good turn, if it is to be done. And I don't like it said among
acquaintance as we've got quarrels in the family. I shall tell Jane that; and I don't mind
driving to Jane's tomorrow, if Pullet doesn't mind. Besides which he considers that his blindness is not from constitution,
but from habit, and is peculiar to himself, because the luminous fire
which kindles the soul in the pupil, was for too long a time and with
too much force, repressed and restrained by a contrary humour, so
that although he might cease from weeping, he cannot be persuaded
that this would result in the longed-for vision.

You will hear what he says to the throng in order that they should enable him to proceed on his
way:

67.

The fifth blind man.

Eyes of mine, with waters ever full, When will the bright spark of the visual ray, Darting, spring
through each veiling obstacle, That I may see again those holy lights That were the alpha of
my darling pain? Ah, woe! I fear me it is quite extinct, So long
oppressed and conquered by its opposite.

Let the blind man pass on!

And turn your eyes upon these founts Which overcome the others one
and all.

Should any dare dispute it with me, There's one would surely answer him again; That in one eye
of mine an ocean is contained.

The sixth blind man is sightless because, through so much weeping, there remains no more moisture,
not even the crystalline and moisture through which, as a diaphanous medium, the visual ray
was transmitted, and the external light and visible species were introduced, so that the heart
became compressed because all the moist substance, whose office it is to keep united the various
parts and opposites, was absorbed, and the amorous affection remains without the effect of tears.
Therefore the organ is destroyed through the victory of the other elements, and it is consequently
left without sight and without consistency of the parts of the body altogether.[AC] He then
proposes to the bystanders that which you shall hear:

68.

The sixth blind man.

Eyes, no longer eyes, fountains no longer founts, Ye have wept out the waters that did keep
The body, soul, and spirit joined in one, And thou, reflecting crystal, which from without
So much unto the soul made manifest, Thou art consumed by the wounded
heart.

So towards the dark and cavernous abyss, I, a blind arid man, direct my steps. Ah, pity me, and
do not hesitate To help my speedy going. I who So many rivers in the dark days spread out,
Finding my only comfort in my tears, Now that my streams and fountains all are dry, Towards profound
oblivion lead the way.

[AC] Water is the first principle of all things; this was the central doctrine of his system (Thales).
Now, if we may believe Aristotle, this thought was suggested to him not so much by contemplating
the illimitable ocean, out of which, as old cosmogonists taught, all things had at first proceeded,
as by noticing the obvious fact, that moisture is found in all living things, and that if it were
absent they would cease to be. Thales, no doubt, believed this humour or moisture to be, as
he said, the essence and principle of all things.--("Encyclopædia Metropolitana.")

The next one avers that he has lost his sight through the intensity of the flame, which, proceeding from
the heart, first destroyed the eyes, and then dried up all the remaining moisture of the substance
of the lover, so that being all melted and turned to flame, he is no longer himself, because the
fire whose property it is to resolve all bodies into their atoms, has converted him into impalpable
dust, whereas by virtue of water alone, the atoms of other bodies
thicken, and are welded together to make a substantial composition.

Yet he is not deprived of the sense of the most intense flame. Therefore, in the sistine he would
have space made for him to pass; for if anybody should be touched by his fires he would become
such that he would have no more feeling of the flames of hell, for their heat would be to him
as cold snow.

69.

The seventh blind man.

Beauty, which through the eyes rushed to the heart, And formed the mighty furnace in my breast,
Absorbing first the visual moisture; then, Spouting aloft its grasping flashing flame, Devouring
every other fluid, To set the dryer element at rest, Has thus reduced me to a boneless dust,
Which now to its own atoms is resolved, If anguish infinite your fears should rouse Make space,
give way, oh peoples! Beware of my fierce penetrating fire, For if it should invade and touch you,
ye Would feel and know the fires of hell To be like winter's cold.

The eighth follows, whose blindness is caused by the dart which love has caused to penetrate
from the eyes to the heart. Hence, he laments not only as being blind, but furthermore because
he is wounded and burnt so fiercely, that he believes no other can be equally so. The sense
of it is easily expressed in this sonnet:--

70.

The eighth blind man.

Vile onslaught, evil struggle, unrighteous palm, Fine point, devouring
fire, strong nerve, Sharp wound, impious ardour, cruel body, Dart,
fire and tangle of that wayward god Who pierced the eyes, inflamed
the heart, bound the soul, Made me at once sightless, a lover, and
a slave, So that, blind I have at all times, in all ways and places,
The feeling of my wound, my fire, my noose.

Men, heroes, and gods! Who be on earth, or near to Ditis or to Jove, I pray ye say, when, how,
and where did ye Feel ever, hear, or see in any place Woes like to these, amongst the oppressed
Amongst the damned, 'mongst lovers?

Finally comes the last one, who is also mute through not having been able, or having dared,
to say that which he most desired to say, for fear of offending or exciting contempt, and he
is deprived of speaking of every other thing: therefore, it is not he who speaks, but his guide
who relates the affair, about which I do not speak, but only bring you the sense thereof:

71.

The guide of the ninth blind man.

Happy are ye, oh all ye sightless lovers, That ye the reason of your pains can tell, By virtue
of your tears you can be sure Of pure and favourable receptions. Amongst you all, the latent fire
of him Whose guide I am, rages most fiercely, Though he is mute for want of boldness To make known
his sorrows to his deity. Make way! open ye wide the way, Be ye benign unto this vacant face,
Oh people full of grievous hindrances, The while this harassed weary trunk Goes knocking at the
doors To meet a death less painful, more profound.

Here are mentioned nine reasons, which are the cause that the human mind is blind as regards the
Divine object and cannot fix its eyes upon it. And of these, the first, allegorized through
the first blind man, is the quality of its own species, which in so far as the degree in which he
finds himself admits, he aspires certainly higher, than he is able to comprehend.

MIN. Because no natural desire is vain, we are able to assure ourselves of a more excellent
state which is suitable to the soul outside of this body, in the which it may be possible
to unite itself, or to approach more nearly, to its object.

SEV. Thou sayest well that no natural impulse or power is without strong reason; it is in fact the
same rule of nature which orders things. So far, it is a thing most true and most certain to well-disposed
intellects, that the human soul, whatever it may show itself while it is in the body, that
same, which it makes manifest in this state, is the expression of its pilgrim existence in
this region; because it aspires to the truth and to universal good, and is not satisfied with
that which comes on account of and to the profit of its species.

The second, represented by the second blind man, proceeds from some troubled affection, as in
the question of Love and Jealousy, the which is like a moth, which has the same subject, enemy
and father, that is, it consumes the cloth or wood from which, it is generated.

MIN. This does not seem to me to take place with heroic love.

SEV. True, according to the same reason which is seen in the lower kind of love; but I mean
according to another reason similar to that which happens to those who love truth and goodness,
which shows itself when they are angry against those who adulterate it, spoil it, or corrupt it, or
who in other ways would treat it with indignity, as has been the case with those who have
brought themselves to suffer death and pains, and to being ignominiously treated by ignorant
peoples and vulgar sects.

MIN. Certainly no one truly loves the truth and the good who is not angry against the multitude;
as no one loves in the ordinary way who is not jealous and fearful about the thing loved.

SEV.
And so he comes to be really blind in many things, and according to the common opinion he is quite
infatuated and mad.

MIN. I have noted a place which says that all those are infatuated and mad, who have sense beyond
and outside of the general sense of other men. But such extravagance is of two kinds, according
as one goes beyond and ascends up higher than the greater number rise or can rise, and these are
they who are inspired with Divine enthusiasm; or by going down lower where those are found who have
greater defect of sense and of reason than the many, and the ordinary; but in that kind of madness,
insensibility and blindness, will not be found the jealous hero.

SEV. Although he is told that much learning makes him mad, yet no one can really abuse him.
The third, represented by the third blind man, proceeds from this: that Divine Truth according
to supernatural reasoning, called metaphysics, manifests itself to
those few to whom it shows itself, and does not proceed with measure
of movement and time as occurs in the physical sciences, that is,
those which are acquired by natural light, the which, in discoursing
of a thing known to reason by means of the senses, proceed to the
knowledge of another thing, unknown, the which discourse is called
argument; but immediately and suddenly, according to the method which
belongs to such efficiency.[AD] Whence a divine has said: "Attenuati
sunt oculi mei suspicientes in excelsum."

[AD] When somewhat of this Perfect Good is discovered and revealed within the soul of man, as it
were in a glance or flash, the soul conceiveth a longing to approach unto the Perfect Goodness.--("Theologia
Germanica.")

MIN. Do you mean then, that the student and the philosopher are not more apt to receive this light
than the ignorant?

SEV. In a certain way no, and in a certain way yes. There is no difference, when the Divine mind
through its providence comes to communicate itself without disposition of the subject; I mean
to say when it communicates itself because it seeks and elects its subject; but there is a great difference,
when it waits and would be sought, and then according to its own good will and pleasure it
makes itself to be found. In this way it does not appear to all, nor can it appear to others,
than to those who seek it. Hence it is said, "Qui quærunt me, invenient me;" and again: "Qui sitit,
veniat et bibat!"

MIN. It is not to be denied, that the apprehension of the second manner is made in Time. (Comes
with time?)

SEV. You do not distinguish between the disposition towards the Divine light and the apprehension
of the same.

The fourth, represented in the following, is not really unworthy, like that which results from the
habit of believing in the false opinions of the vulgar, which are very far removed from the opinions
of philosophers, and are derived from the study of vulgar philosophies, which are by the multitude
considered the more true, the more they appeal to common sense. And this habit is one of the
greatest and strongest disadvantages, because as Alcazele and Averroes showed, it is like that
which happens to those persons who from childhood and youth are in the habit of eating poison,
and have become such, that it is converted into sweet and proper nutriment, and on the other hand,
they abominate those things which are really good and sweet according to common nature; but it is most
worthy, because it is founded upon the habit of looking at the true light; the which habit cannot
come into use for the multitude, as we have said. This blindness is heroic, and is of such
a kind that it can worthily satisfy the present heroic blind man, who is so far from troubling
himself about it that he is able to explain every other sight, and he would crave nothing else from
the community save a free passage and progress in contemplation, for he finds himself usually
hampered and blocked by obstacles and opposition.

The fifth results from the disproportion of the means of our cognition to the knowable; seeing that
in order to contemplate Divine things, the eyes must be opened by means of images, analogies and other
reasonings which by the Peripatetics are comprehended under the name of fancies (fantasmi); or, by means
of Being, to proceed to speculate about Essence, by means of its effects and the knowledge of
the cause; the which means, are so far from ensuring the attainment of such an end, that it
is easier to believe that the highest and most profound cognition of Divine things, is through
negation and not through affirmation, knowing that the Divine beauty and goodness is not that
which can or does fall within our conception, but that which is above
and beyond, incomprehensible; chiefly in that condition called by
the philosopher speculation of phantoms, and by the theologian, vision
through analogies, reflections and enigmas, because we see, not the
true effects and the true species of things, or the substance of ideas,
but the shadows, vestiges and simulacra of them, like those who are
inside the cave and have from their birth their shoulders turned away
from the entrance of the light, and their faces towards the end, where
they do not see that which is in reality, but the shadows of that
which is found substantially outside the cave. Therefore by the open
vision which it has lost, and knows it has lost, a spirit similar
to or better than that of Plato weeps, desiring exit from the cave,
whence, not through reflexion, but through immediate conversion he
may see the light again.

MIN. It appears to me that this blind man
does not refer to the difficulty which proceeds from reflective vision,
but to that which is caused through the medium between the visual
power and the object.

SEV. These two modes, although they are distinct
in the sensitive cognition, or ocular vision, at the same time are
united together in the rational or intellectual cognition.

MIN. It
seems to me that I have heard and read that in every vision, the means,
or the intermediary is required between the power and the object.
Because as by means of the light diffused in the air and the figure
of the thing, which in a certain way proceeds from that which is seen,
to that which sees, the act of seeing is put into effect, so in the
intellectual region, where shines the sun of the intellect, acting
between the intelligible species formed as proceeding from the object,
our intellect comes to comprehend something of the divinity, or something
inferior to it. Because, as our eye, when we see, does not receive
the light of the fire and of gold, in substance, but in similitude;
so the intellect, in whatever state it is found, does not receive
the divinity substantially, so that there should be substantially
as many gods as there are intelligences, but in similitude; therefore
they are not formally gods, but denominatively divine, the divinity
and Divine beauty being one, exalted above all things.

SEV. You say
well; but for all your well saying, there is no need for me to retract,
because I have never said the contrary. But I must declare and explain.
Therefore, first I maintain that the immediate vision, so called and
understood by us, does not do away with that sort of medium which
is the intelligible species, nor that which is the light; but that
which is equal to the thickness and density of the crystalline or
opaque intermediate body; as happens to him who sees by means of the
waters more or less turbid, or air foggy and cloudy, who would believe
he was looking as without a medium when it was conceded to him to
look through the pure air, light and clear.

But let us return. The
sixth, represented in the following, is caused only by the imbecility
and unreality of the body, which is in continual motion, mutation,
and change, the operations of which must follow the condition of its
faculty, the which is a result of the condition of its nature and
being. And Mr. Glegg
was just as fond of saving other people's money as his own; he would have ridden as far round
to avoid a turnpike when his expenses were to be paid for him, as when they were to come out
of his own pocket, and was quite zealous in trying to induce indifferent acquaintances to adopt
a cheap substitute for blacking. This inalienable habit of saving, as an end in itself, belonged
to the industrious men of business of a former generation, who made their fortunes slowly,
almost as the tracking of the fox belongs to the harrier,--it constituted them a "race," which
is nearly lost in these days of rapid money-getting, when lavishness comes close on the back
of want. In old-fashioned times an "independence" was hardly ever made without a little miserliness
as a condition, and you would have found that quality in every provincial district, combined
with characters as various as the fruits from which we can extract acid. The true Harpagons
were always marked and exceptional characters; not so the worthy tax-payers, who, having once
pinched from real necessity, retained even in the midst of their comfortable retirement, with
their wallfruit and wine-bins, the habit of regarding life as an ingenious process of nibbling
out one's livelihood without leaving any perceptible deficit, and who would have been as immediately
prompted to give up a newly taxed luxury when they had had their clear five hundred a year,
as when they had only five hundred pounds of capital. Mr. Glegg was one of these men, found
so impracticable by chancellors of the exchequer; and knowing this, you will be the better
able to understand why he had not swerved from the conviction that he had made an eligible
marriage, in spite of the too-pungent seasoning that nature had given to the eldest Miss Dodson's
virtues. A man with an affectionate disposition, who finds a wife to concur with his fundamental
idea of life, easily comes to persuade himself that no other woman would have suited him so
well, and does a little daily snapping and quarrelling without any sense of alienation. Mr.
Glegg, being of a reflective turn, and no longer occupied with wool, had much wondering meditation
on the peculiar constitution of the female mind as unfolded to him in his domestic life; and
yet he thought Mrs. Glegg's household ways a model for her sex. It struck him as a pitiable
irregularity in other women if they did not roll up their table-napkins with the same tightness
and emphasis as Mrs. Glegg did, if their pastry had a less leathery consistence, and their
damson cheese a less venerable hardness than hers; nay, even the peculiar combination of grocery
and druglike odors in Mrs. Glegg's private cupboard impressed him as the only right thing in
the way of cupboard smells. I am not sure that he would not have longed for the quarrelling
again, if it had ceased for an entire week; and it is certain that an acquiescent, mild wife
would have left his meditations comparatively jejune and barren of mystery.

Mr. Glegg's unmistakable kind-heartedness was shown in this, that it pained him more to see
his wife at variance with others,--even with Dolly, the servant,--than to be in a state of
cavil with her himself; and the quarrel between her and Mr. Tulliver vexed him so much that
it quite nullified the pleasure he would otherwise have had in the state of his early cabbages,
as he walked in his garden before breakfast the next morning. Still, he went in to breakfast
with some slight hope that, now Mrs. Glegg had "slept upon it," her anger might be subdued
enough to give way to her usually strong sense of family decorum. She had been used to boast
that there had never been any of those deadly quarrels among the Dodsons which had disgraced
other families; that no Dodson had ever been "cut off with a shilling," and no cousin of the
Dodsons disowned; as, indeed, why should they be? For they had no cousins who had not money
out at use, or some houses of their own, at the very least.

There was one evening-cloud which had always disappeared from Mrs. Glegg's brow when she sat
at the breakfast-table. It was her fuzzy front of curls; for as she occupied herself in household
matters in the morning it would have been a mere extravagance to put on anything so superfluous
to the making of leathery pastry as a fuzzy curled front. By half-past ten decorum demanded
the front; until then Mrs. Glegg could economize it, and society would never be any the wiser.
But the absence of that cloud only left it more apparent that the cloud of severity remained;
and Mr. Glegg, perceiving this, as he sat down to his milkporridge, which it was his old frugal
habit to stem his morning hunger with, prudently resolved to leave the first remark to Mrs.
Glegg, lest, to so delicate an article as a lady's temper, the slightest touch should do mischief.
People who seem to enjoy their ill temper have a way of keeping it in fine condition by inflicting
privations on themselves. That was Mrs. Glegg's way. She made her tea weaker than usual this
morning, and declined butter. It was a hard case that a vigorous mood for quarrelling, so highly
capable of using an opportunity, should not meet with a single remark from Mr. Glegg on which
to exercise itself. But by and by it appeared that his silence would answer the purpose, for
he heard himself apostrophized at last in that tone peculiar to the wife of one's bosom.

"Well, Mr. Glegg! it's a poor return I get for making you the wife I've made you all these
years. If this is the way I'm to be treated, I'd better ha' known it before my poor father
died, and then, when I'd wanted a home, I should ha' gone elsewhere, as the choice was offered me."

Mr. Glegg paused from his porridge and looked up, not with any new amazement, but simply with
that quiet, habitual wonder with which we regard constant mysteries.

"Why, Mrs. G., what have I done now?"

"Done now, Mr. Glegg? done now?--I'm sorry for you."

Not seeing his way to any pertinent answer, Mr. Glegg reverted to his porridge.

"There's husbands in the world," continued Mrs. Glegg, after a pause, "as 'ud have known how
to do something different to siding with everybody else against their own wives. Perhaps I'm
wrong and you can teach me better. But I've allays heard as it's the husband's place to stand
by the wife, instead o' rejoicing and triumphing when folks insult her."

"Now, what call have you to say that?" said Mr. Glegg, rather warmly, for though a kind man,
he was not as meek as Moses. "When did I rejoice or triumph over you?"

"There's ways o' doing things worse than speaking out plain, Mr. Glegg. I'd sooner you'd tell
me to my face as you make light of me, than try to make out as everybody's in the right but
me, and come to your breakfast in the morning, as I've hardly slept an hour this night, and
sulk at me as if I was the dirt under your feet."

"Sulk at you?" said Mr. Glegg, in a tone of angry facetiousness. "You're like a tipsy man as
thinks everybody's had too much but himself."

"Don't lower yourself with using coarse language to me, Mr. Glegg! It makes you look very small,
though you can't see yourself," said Mrs. Glegg, in a tone of energetic compassion. "A man
in your place should set an example, and talk more sensible."

"Yes; but will you listen to sense?" retorted Mr. Glegg, sharply. "The best sense I can talk
to you is what I said last night,--as you're i' the wrong to think o' calling in your money,
when it's safe enough if you'd let it alone, all because of a bit of a tiff, and I was in hopes
you'd ha' altered your mind this morning. But if you'd like to call it in, don't do it in a
hurry now, and breed more enmity in the family, but wait till there's a pretty mortgage to
be had without any trouble. You'd have to set the lawyer to work now to find an investment,
and make no end o' expense."

Mrs. Glegg felt there was really something in this, but she tossed her head and emitted a guttural
interjection to indicate that her silence was only an armistice, not a peace. And, in fact
hostilities soon broke out again.

"I'll thank you for my cup o' tea, now, Mrs. G.," said Mr. Glegg, seeing that she did not proceed
to give it him as usual, when he had finished his porridge. She lifted the teapot with a slight
toss of the head, and said,--

"I'm glad to hear you'll thank me, Mr. Glegg. It's little thanks I get for what I do for folks
i' this world. Though there's never a woman o' your side o' the family, Mr. Glegg, as is fit
to stand up with me, and I'd say it if I was on my dying bed. Not but what I've allays conducted
myself civil to your kin, and there isn't one of 'em can say the contrary, though my equils
they aren't, and nobody shall make me say it."

"You'd better leave finding fault wi' my kin till you've left off quarrelling with you own,
Mrs. G.," said Mr. Glegg, with angry sarcasm. "I'll trouble you for the milk-jug."

"That's as false a word as ever you spoke, Mr. Glegg," said the lady, pouring out the milk
with unusual profuseness, as much as to say, if he wanted milk he should have it with a vengeance.
"And you know it's false. I'm not the woman to quarrel with my own kin; you may, for I've known
you to do it."

"Why, what did you call it yesterday, then, leaving your sister's house in a tantrum?"

"I'd no quarrel wi' my sister, Mr. Glegg, and it's false to say it. Mr. Tulliver's none o'
my blood, and it was him quarrelled with me, and drove me out o' the house. But perhaps you'd
have had me stay and be swore at, Mr. Glegg; perhaps you was vexed not to hear more abuse and
foul language poured out upo' your own wife. But, let me tell you, it's your disgrace."

"Did ever anybody hear the like i' this parish?" said Mr. Glegg, getting hot. "A woman, with
everything provided for her, and allowed to keep her own money the same as if it was settled
on her, and with a gig new stuffed and lined at no end o' expense, and provided for when I
die beyond anything she could expect--to go on i' this way, biting and snapping like a mad
dog! It's beyond everything, as God A 'mighty should ha' made women so." (These last words
were uttered in a tone of sorrowful agitation. Mr. Glegg pushed his tea from him, and tapped
the table with both his hands.)

"Well, Mr. Glegg, if those are your feelings, it's best they should be known," said Mrs. Glegg,
taking off her napkin, and folding it in an excited manner. "But if you talk o' my being provided
for beyond what I could expect, I beg leave to tell you as I'd a right to expect a many things
as I don't find. And as to my being like a mad dog, it's well if you're not cried shame on
by the county for your treatment of me, for it's what I can't bear, and I won't bear----"

Here Mrs. Glegg's voice intimated that she was going to cry, and breaking off from speech,
she rang the bell violently.

"Sally," she said, rising from her chair, and speaking in rather a choked voice, "light a fire
up-stairs, and put the blinds down. Mr. Glegg, you'll please to order what you'd like for dinner.
I shall have gruel."

Mrs. Glegg walked across the room to the small book-case, and took down Baxter's "Saints' Everlasting
Rest," which she carried with her up-stairs. It was the book she was accustomed to lay open
before her on special occasions,--on wet Sunday mornings, or when she heard of a death in the
family, or when, as in this case, her quarrel with Mr. Glegg had been set an octave higher
than usual.

But Mrs. Glegg carried something else up-stairs with her, which, together with the "Saints'
Rest" and the gruel, may have had some influence in gradually calming her feelings, and making
it possible for her to endure existence on the ground-floor, shortly before tea-time. This
was, partly, Mr. Glegg's suggestion that she would do well to let her five hundred lie still
until a good investment turned up; and, further, his parenthetic hint at his handsome provision
for her in case of his death. Mr. Glegg, like all men of his stamp, was extremely reticent
about his will; and Mrs. Glegg, in her gloomier moments, had forebodings that, like other husbands
of whom she had heard, he might cherish the mean project of heightening her grief at his death
by leaving her poorly off, in which case she was firmly resolved that she would have scarcely
any weeper on her bonnet, and would cry no more than if he had been a second husband. But if
he had really shown her any testamentary tenderness, it would be affecting to think of him,
poor man, when he was gone; and even his foolish fuss about the flowers and garden-stuff, and
his insistence on the subject of snails, would be touching when it was once fairly at an end.
To survive Mr. Glegg, and talk eulogistically of him as a man who might have his weaknesses,
but who had done the right thing by her, not-withstanding his numerous poor relations; to have
sums of interest coming in more frequently, and secrete it in various corners, baffling to
the most ingenious of thieves (for, to Mrs. Glegg's mind, banks and strong-boxes would have
nullified the pleasure of property; she might as well have taken her food in capsules); finally,
to be looked up to by her own family and the neighborhood, so as no woman can ever hope to
be who has not the præterite and present dignity comprised in being a "widow well left,"--all
this made a flattering and conciliatory view of the future. So that when good Mr. Glegg, restored
to good humor by much hoeing, and moved by the sight of his wife's empty chair, with her knitting
rolled up in the corner, went up-stairs to her, and observed that the bell had been tolling
for poor Mr. Morton, Mrs. Glegg answered magnanimously, quite as if she had been an uninjured
woman: "Ah! then, there'll be a good business for somebody to take to."

Baxter had been open at least eight hours by this time, for it was nearly five o'clock; and
if people are to quarrel often, it follows as a corollary that their quarrels cannot be protracted
beyond certain limits.

Mr. and Mrs. Glegg talked quite amicably about the Tullivers that evening. Mr. Glegg went the
length of admitting that Tulliver was a sad man for getting into hot water, and was like enough
to run through his property; and Mrs. Glegg, meeting this acknowledgment half-way, declared
that it was beneath her to take notice of such a man's conduct, and that, for her sister's
sake, she would let him keep the five hundred a while longer, for when she put it out on a
mortgage she should only get four per cent.

Chapter XIII

Mr. Tulliver Further Entangles the Skein of Life

Owing to this new adjustment of Mrs. Glegg's thoughts, Mrs. Pullet found her task of mediation
the next day surprisingly easy. Mrs. Glegg, indeed checked her rather sharply for thinking
it would be necessary to tell her elder sister what was the right mode of behavior in family
matters. Mrs. Pullet's argument, that it would look ill in the neighborhood if people should
have it in their power to say that there was a quarrel in the family, was particularly offensive.
If the family name never suffered except through Mrs. Glegg, Mrs. Pullet might lay her head
on her pillow in perfect confidence.

"It's not to be expected, I suppose," observed Mrs. Glegg, by way of winding up the subject,
"as I shall go to the mill again before Bessy comes to see me, or as I shall go and fall down
o' my knees to Mr. Tulliver, and ask his pardon for showing him favors; but I shall bear no
malice, and when Mr. Tulliver speaks civil to me, I'll speak civil to him. Nobody has any call
to tell me what's becoming."

Finding it unnecessary to plead for the Tullivers, it was natural that aunt Pullet should relax
a little in her anxiety for them, and recur to the annoyance she had suffered yesterday from
the offspring of that apparently ill-fated house. Mrs. Glegg heard a circumstantial narrative,
to which Mr. Pullet's remarkable memory furnished some items; and while aunt Pullet pitied
poor Bessy's bad luck with her children, and expressed a half-formed project of paying for
Maggie's being sent to a distant boarding-school, which would not prevent her being so brown,
but might tend to subdue some other vices in her, aunt Glegg blamed Bessy for her weakness,
and appealed to all witnesses who should be living when the Tulliver children had turned out
ill, that she, Mrs. Glegg, had always said how it would be from the very first, observing that
it was wonderful to herself how all her words came true.

"Then I may call and tell Bessy you'll bear no malice, and everything be as it was before?"
Mrs. Pullet said, just before parting.

"Yes, you may, Sophy," said Mrs. Glegg; "you may tell Mr. Tulliver, and Bessy too, as I'm not
going to behave ill because folks behave ill to me; I know it's my place, as the eldest, to
set an example in every respect, and I do it. Nobody can say different of me, if they'll keep
to the truth."

Mrs. Glegg being in this state of satisfaction in her own lofty magnanimity, I leave you to
judge what effect was produced on her by the reception of a short letter from Mr. Tulliver
that very evening, after Mrs. Pullet's departure, informing her that she needn't trouble her
mind about her five hundred pounds, for it should be paid back to her in the course of the
next month at farthest, together with the interest due thereon until the time of payment. And
furthermore, that Mr. Tulliver had no wish to behave uncivilly to Mrs. Glegg, and she was welcome
to his house whenever she liked to come, but he desired no favors from her, either for himself
or his children.

It was poor Mrs. Tulliver who had hastened this catastrophe, entirely through that irrepressible
hopefulness of hers which led her to expect that similar causes may at any time produce different
results. It had very often occurred in her experience that Mr. Tulliver had done something
because other people had said he was not able to do it, or had pitied him for his supposed
inability, or in any other way piqued his pride; still, she thought to-day, if she told him
when he came in to tea that sister Pullet was gone to try and make everything up with sister
Glegg, so that he needn't think about paying in the money, it would give a cheerful effect
to the meal. Mr. Tulliver had never slackened in his resolve to raise the money, but now he
at once determined to write a letter to Mrs. Glegg, which should cut off all possibility of
mistake. Mrs. Pullet gone to beg and pray for him indeed! Mr. Tulliver did not willingly write
a letter, and found the relation between spoken and written language, briefly known as spelling,
one of the most puzzling things in this puzzling world. Nevertheless, like all fervid writing,
the task was done in less time than usual, and if the spelling differed from Mrs. Glegg's,--why,
she belonged, like himself, to a generation with whom spelling was a matter of private judgment.

Mrs. Glegg did not alter her will in consequence of this letter, and cut off the Tulliver children
from their sixth and seventh share in her thousand pounds; for she had her principles. No one
must be able to say of her when she was dead that she had not divided her money with perfect
fairness among her own kin. In the matter of wills, personal qualities were subordinate to
the great fundamental fact of blood; and to be determined in the distribution of your property
by caprice, and not make your legacies bear a direct ratio to degrees of kinship, was a prospective
disgrace that would have embittered her life. This had always been a principle in the Dodson
family; it was one form if that sense of honor and rectitude which was a proud tradition in
such families,--a tradition which has been the salt of our provincial society.

But though the letter could not shake Mrs. Glegg's principles, it made the family breach much
more difficult to mend; and as to the effect it produced on Mrs. Glegg's opinion of Mr. Tulliver,
she begged to be understood from that time forth that she had nothing whatever to say about
him; his state of mind, apparently, was too corrupt for her to contemplate it for a moment.
It was not until the evening before Tom went to school, at the beginning of August, that Mrs.
Glegg paid a visit to her sister Tulliver, sitting in her gig all the while, and showing her
displeasure by markedly abstaining from all advice and criticism; for, as she observed to her
sister Deane, "Bessy must bear the consequence o' having such a husband, though I'm sorry for
her," and Mrs. Deane agreed that Bessy was pitiable.

That evening Tom observed to Maggie: "Oh my! Maggie, aunt Glegg's beginning to come again;
I'm glad I'm going to school. You'll catch it all now!"

Maggie was already so full of sorrow at the thought of Tom's going away from her, that this
playful exultation of his seemed very unkind, and she cried herself to sleep that night.

Mr. Tulliver's prompt procedure entailed on him further promptitude in finding the convenient
person who was desirous of lending five hundred pounds on bond. "It must be no client of Wakem's,"
he said to himself; and yet at the end of a fortnight it turned out to the contrary; not because
Mr. Tulliver's will was feeble, but because external fact was stronger. Wakem's client was
the only convenient person to be found. Mr. Tulliver had a destiny as well as Œdipus, and in
this case he might plead, like Œdipus, that his deed was inflicted on him rather than committed
by him.

Book II

School-Time

Chapter I

Tom's "First Half"

Tom Tulliver'S sufferings during the first quarter he was at King's Lorton, under the distinguished
care of the Rev. Walter Stelling, were rather severe. At Mr. Jacob's academy life had not presented
itself to him as a difficult problem; there were plenty of fellows to play with, and Tom being
good at all active games,--fighting especially,--had that precedence among them which appeared
to him inseparable from the personality of Tom Tulliver. Mr. Jacobs himself, familiarly known
as Old Goggles, from his habit of wearing spectacles, imposed no painful awe; and if it was
the property of snuffy old hypocrites like him to write like copperplate and surround their
signatures with arabesques, to spell without forethought, and to spout "my name is Norval"
without bungling, Tom, for his part, was glad he was not in danger of those mean accomplishments.
He was not going to be a snuffy schoolmaster, he, but a substantial man, like his father, who
used to go hunting when he was younger, and rode a capital black mare,--as pretty a bit of
horse-flesh as ever you saw; Tom had heard what her points were a hundred times. He meant to
go hunting too, and to be generally respected. When people were grown up, he considered, nobody
inquired about their writing and spelling; when he was a man, he should be master of everything,
and do just as he liked. It had been very difficult for him to reconcile himself to the idea
that his school-time was to be prolonged and that he was not to be brought up to his father's
business, which he had always thought extremely pleasant; for it was nothing but riding about,
giving orders, and going to market; and he thought that a clergyman would give him a great
many Scripture lessons, and probably make him learn the Gospel and Epistle on a Sunday, as
well as the Collect. But in the absence of specific information, it was impossible for him
to imagine that school and a schoolmaster would be something entirely different from the academy
of Mr. Jacobs. So, not to be at a deficiency, in case of his finding genial companions, he
had taken care to carry with him a small box of percussion-caps; not that there was anything
particular to be done with them, but they would serve to impress strange boys with a sense
of his familiarity with guns. Thus poor Tom, though he saw very clearly through Maggie's illusions,
was not without illusions of his own, which were to be cruelly dissipated by his enlarged experience
at King's Lorton.

He had not been there a fortnight before it was evident to him that life, complicated not only
with the Latin grammar but with a new standard of English pronunciation, was a very difficult
business, made all the more obscure by a thick mist of bash fulness. Tom, as you have observed,
was never an exception among boys for ease of address; but the difficulty of enunciating a
monosyllable in reply to Mr. or Mrs. Stelling was so great, that he even dreaded to be asked
at table whether he would have more pudding. As to the percussion-caps, he had almost resolved,
in the bitterness of his heart, that he would throw them into a neighboring pond; for not only
was he the solitary pupil, but he began even to have a certain scepticism about guns, and a
general sense that his theory of life was undermined. For Mr. Stelling thought nothing of guns,
or horses either, apparently; and yet it was impossible for Tom to despise Mr. Stelling as
he had despised Old Goggles. If there were anything that was not thoroughly genuine about Mr.
Stelling, it lay quite beyond Tom's power to detect it; it is only by a wide comparison of
facts that the wisest full-grown man can distinguish well-rolled barrels from mere supernal
thunder.

Mr. Stelling was a well-sized, broad-chested man, not yet thirty, with flaxen hair standing
erect, and large lightish-gray eyes, which were always very wide open; he had a sonorous bass
voice, and an air of defiant self-confidence inclining to brazenness. He had entered on his
career with great vigor, and intended to make a considerable impression on his fellowmen. The
Rev. Walter Stelling was not a man who would remain among the "inferior clergy" all his life.
He had a true British determination to push his way in the world,--as a schoolmaster, in the
first place, for there were capital masterships of grammar-schools to be had, and Mr. Stelling
meant to have one of them; but as a preacher also, for he meant always to preach in a striking
manner, so as to have his congregation swelled by admirers from neighboring parishes, and to
produce a great sensation whenever he took occasional duty for a brother clergyman of minor
gifts. The style of preaching he had chosen was the extemporaneous, which was held little short
of the miraculous in rural parishes like King's Lorton. Some passages of Massillon and Bourdaloue,
which he knew by heart, were really very effective when rolled out in Mr. Stelling's deepest
tones; but as comparatively feeble appeals of his own were delivered in the same loud and impressive
manner, they were often thought quite as striking by his hearers. Mr. Stelling's doctrine was
of no particular school; if anything, it had a tinge of evangelicalism, for that was "the telling
thing" just then in the diocese to which King's Lorton belonged. In short, Mr. Stelling was
a man who meant to rise in his profession, and to rise by merit, clearly, since he had no interest
beyond what might be promised by a problematic relationship to a great lawyer who had not yet
become Lord Chancellor. A clergyman who has such vigorous intentions naturally gets a little
into debt at starting; it is not to be expected that he will live in the meagre style of a
man who means to be a poor curate all his life; and if the few hundreds Mr. Timpson advanced
toward his daughter's fortune did not suffice for the purchase of handsome furniture, together
with a stock of wine, a grand piano, and the laying out of a superior flower-garden, it followed
in the most rigorous manner, either that these things must be procured by some other means,
or else that the Rev. Mr. Stelling must go without them, which last alternative would be an
absurd procrastination of the fruits of success, where success was certain. Mr. Stelling was
so broad-chested and resolute that he felt equal to anything; he would become celebrated by
shaking the consciences of his hearers, and he would by and by edit a Greek play, and invent
several new readings. He had not yet selected the play, for having been married little more
than two years, his leisure time had been much occupied with attentions to Mrs. Stelling; but
he had told that fine woman what he meant to do some day, and she felt great confidence in
her husband, as a man who understood everything of that sort.

But the immediate step to future success was to bring on Tom Tulliver during this first half-year;
for, by a singular coincidence, there had been some negotiation concerning another pupil from
the same neighborhood and it might further a decision in Mr. Stelling's favor, if it were understood
that young Tulliver, who, Mr. Stelling observed in conjugal privacy, was rather a rough cub,
had made prodigious progress in a short time. It was on this ground that he was severe with
Tom about his lessons; he was clearly a boy whose powers would never be developed through the
medium of the Latin grammar, without the application of some sternness. Not that Mr. Stelling
was a harsh-tempered or unkind man; quite the contrary. He was jocose with Tom at table, and
corrected his provincialisms and his deportment in the most playful manner; but poor Tom was
only the more cowed and confused by this double novelty, for he had never been used to jokes
at all like Mr. Stelling's; and for the first time in his life he had a painful sense that
he was all wrong somehow. When Mr. Stelling said, as the roast-beef was being uncovered, "Now,
Tulliver! which would you rather decline, roast-beef or the Latin for it?" Tom, to whom in
his coolest moments a pun would have been a hard nut, was thrown into a state of embarrassed
alarm that made everything dim to him except the feeling that he would rather not have anything
to do with Latin; of course he answered, "Roast-beef," whereupon there followed much laughter
and some practical joking with the plates, from which Tom gathered that he had in some mysterious
way refused beef, and, in fact, made himself appear "a silly." If he could have seen a fellow-pupil
undergo these painful operations and survive them in good spirits, he might sooner have taken
them as a matter of course. But there are two expensive forms of education, either of which
a parent may procure for his son by sending him as solitary pupil to a clergyman: one is the
enjoyment of the reverend gentleman's undivided neglect; the other is the endurance of the
reverend gentleman's undivided attention. It was the latter privilege for which Mr. Tulliver
paid a high price in Tom's initiatory months at King's Lorton.

That respectable miller and maltster had left Tom behind, and driven homeward in a state of
great mental satisfaction. He considered that it was a happy moment for him when he had thought
of asking Riley's advice about a tutor for Tom. Mr. Stelling's eyes were so wide open, and
he talked in such an off-hand, matter-of-fact way, answering every difficult, slow remark of
Mr. Tulliver's with, "I see, my good sir, I see"; "To be sure, to be sure"; "You want your
son to be a man who will make his way in the world,"--that Mr. Tulliver was delighted to find
in him a clergyman whose knowledge was so applicable to the every-day affairs of this life.
Except Counsellor Wylde, whom he had heard at the last sessions, Mr. Tulliver thought the Rev.
Mr Stelling was the shrewdest fellow he had ever met with,--not unlike Wylde, in fact; he had
the same way of sticking his thumbs in the armholes of his waistcoat. Mr. Tulliver was not
by any means an exception in mistaking brazenness for shrewdness; most laymen thought Stelling
shrewd, and a man of remarkable powers generally; it was chiefly by his clerical brethren that
he was considered rather a full fellow. But he told Mr. Tulliver several stories about "Swing"
and incendiarism, and asked his advice about feeding pigs in so thoroughly secular and judicious
a manner, with so much polished glibness of tongue, that the miller thought, here was the very
thing he wanted for Tom. He had no doubt this first-rate man was acquainted with every branch
of information, and knew exactly what Tom must learn in order to become a match for the lawyers,
which poor Mr. Tulliver himself did not know, and so was necessarily thrown for self-direction
on this wide kind of inference. It is hardly fair to laugh at him, for I have known much more
highly instructed persons than he make inferences quite as wide, and not at all wiser.

As for Mrs. Tulliver, finding that Mrs. Stelling's views as to the airing of linen and the
frequent recurrence of hunger in a growing boy entirely coincided with her own; moreover, that
Mrs. Stelling, though so young a woman, and only anticipating her second confinement, had gone
through very nearly the same experience as herself with regard to the behavior and fundamental
character of the monthly nurse,--she expressed great contentment to her husband, when they
drove away, at leaving Tom with a woman who, in spite of her youth, seemed quite sensible and
motherly, and asked advice as prettily as could be.

"They must be very well off, though," said Mrs. Tulliver, "for everything's as nice as can
be all over the house, and that watered silk she had on cost a pretty penny. Sister Pullet
has got one like it."

"Ah," said Mr. Tulliver, "he's got some income besides the curacy, I reckon. Perhaps her father
allows 'em something. There's Tom 'ull be another hundred to him, and not much trouble either,
by his own account; he says teaching comes natural to him. That's wonderful, now," added Mr.
Tulliver, turning his head on one side, and giving his horse a meditative tickling on the flank.

Perhaps it was because teaching came naturally to Mr. Stelling, that he set about it with that
uniformity of method and independence of circumstances which distinguish the actions of animals
understood to be under the immediate teaching of nature. Mr. Broderip's amiable beaver, as
that charming naturalist tells us, busied himself as earnestly in constructing a dam, in a
room up three pair of stairs in London, as if he had been laying his foundation in a stream
or lake in Upper Canada. It was "Binny's" function to build; the absence of water or of possible
progeny was an accident for which he was not accountable. With the same unerring instinct Mr.
Stelling set to work at his natural method of instilling the Eton Grammar and Euclid into the
mind of Tom Tulliver. This, he considered, was the only basis of solid instruction; all other
means of education were mere charlatanism, and could produce nothing better than smatterers.
Fixed on this firm basis, a man might observe the display of various or special knowledge made
by irregularly educated people with a pitying smile; all that sort of thing was very well,
but it was impossible these people could form sound opinions. In holding this conviction Mr.
Stelling was not biassed, as some tutors have been, by the excessive accuracy or extent of
his own scholarship; and as to his views about Euclid, no opinion could have been freer from
personal partiality. Mr. Stelling was very far from being led astray by enthusiasm, either
religious or intellectual; on the other hand, he had no secret belief that everything was humbug.
He thought religion was a very excellent thing, and Aristotle a great authority, and deaneries
and prebends useful institutions, and Great Britain the providential bulwark of Protestantism,
and faith in the unseen a great support to afflicted minds; he believed in all these things,
as a Swiss hotel-keeper believes in the beauty of the scenery around him, and in the pleasure
it gives to artistic visitors. And in the same way Mr. Stelling believed in his method of education;
he had no doubt that he was doing the very best thing for Mr. Tulliver's boy. Of course, when
the miller talked of "mapping" and "summing" in a vague and diffident manner, Mr Stelling had
set his mind at rest by an assurance that he understood what was wanted; for how was it possible
the good man could form any reasonable judgment about the matter? Mr Stelling's duty was to
teach the lad in the only right way,--indeed he knew no other; he had not wasted his time in
the acquirement of anything abnormal.

He very soon set down poor Tom as a thoroughly stupid lad; for though by hard labor he could
get particular declensions into his brain, anything so abstract as the relation between cases
and terminations could by no means get such a lodgment there as to enable him to recognize
a chance genitive or dative. This struck Mr. Stelling as something more than natural stupidity;
he suspected obstinacy, or at any rate indifference, and lectured Tom severely on his want
of thorough application. "You feel no interest in what you're doing, sir," Mr. Stelling would
say, and the reproach was painfully true. Tom had never found any difficulty in discerning
a pointer from a setter, when once he had been told the distinction, and his perceptive powers
were not at all deficient. I fancy they were quite as strong as those of the Rev. Mr. Stelling;
for Tom could predict with accuracy what number of horses were cantering behind him, he could
throw a stone right into the centre of a given ripple, he could guess to a fraction how many
lengths of his stick it would take to reach across the playground, and could draw almost perfect
squares on his slate without any measurement. But Mr. Stelling took no note of these things;
he only observed that Tom's faculties failed him before the abstractions hideously symbolized
to him in the pages of the Eton Grammar, and that he was in a state bordering on idiocy with
regard to the demonstration that two given triangles must be equal, though he could discern
with great promptitude and certainty the fact that they were equal. Whence Mr. Stelling concluded
that Tom's brain, being peculiarly impervious to etymology and demonstrations, was peculiarly
in need of being ploughed and harrowed by these patent implements; it was his favorite metaphor,
that the classics and geometry constituted that culture of the mind which prepared it for the
reception of any subsequent crop. I say nothing against Mr. Stelling's theory; if we are to
have one regimen for all minds, his seems to me as good as any other. I only know it turned
out as uncomfortably for Tom Tulliver as if he had been plied with cheese in order to remedy
a gastric weakness which prevented him from digesting it. It is astonishing what a different
result one gets by changing the metaphor! Once call the brain an intellectual stomach, and
one's ingenious conception of the classics and geometry as ploughs and harrows seems to settle
nothing. But then it is open to some one else to follow great authorities, and call the mind
a sheet of white paper or a mirror, in which case one's knowledge of the digestive process
becomes quite irrelevant. It was doubtless an ingenious idea to call the camel the ship of
the desert, but it would hardly lead one far in training that useful beast. O Aristotle! if
you had had the advantage of being "the freshest modern" instead of the greatest ancient, would
you not have mingled your praise of metaphorical speech, as a sign of high intelligence, with
a lamentation that intelligence so rarely shows itself in speech without metaphor,--that we
can so seldom declare what a thing is, except by saying it is something else?

Tom Tulliver, being abundant in no form of speech, did not use any metaphor to declare his
views as to the nature of Latin; he never called it an instrument of torture; and it was not
until he had got on some way in the next half-year, and in the Delectus, that he was advanced
enough to call it a "bore" and "beastly stuff." At present, in relation to this demand that
he should learn Latin declensions and conjugations, Tom was in a state of as blank unimaginativeness
concerning the cause and tendency of his sufferings, as if he had been an innocent shrewmouse
imprisoned in the split trunk of an ash-tree in order to cure lameness in cattle. It is doubtless
almost incredible to instructed minds of the present day that a boy of twelve, not belonging
strictly to "the masses," who are now understood to have the monopoly of mental darkness, should
have had no distinct idea how there came to be such a thing as Latin on this earth; yet so
it was with Tom. It would have taken a long while to make conceivable to him that there ever
existed a people who bought and sold sheep and oxen, and transacted the every-day affairs of
life, through the medium of this language; and still longer to make him understand why he should
be called upon to learn it, when its connection with those affairs had become entirely latent.
So far as Tom had gained any acquaintance with the Romans at Mr. Jacob's academy, his knowledge
was strictly correct, but it went no farther than the fact that they were "in the New Testament";
and Mr. Stelling was not the man to enfeeble and emasculate his pupil's mind by simplifying
and explaining, or to reduce the tonic effect of etymology by mixing it with smattering, extraneous
information, such as is given to girls.

Yet, strange to say, under this vigorous treatment Tom became more like a girl than he had
ever been in his life before. He had a large share of pride, which had hitherto found itself
very comfortable in the world, despising Old Goggles, and reposing in the sense of unquestioned
rights; but now this same pride met with nothing but bruises and crushings. Tom was too clear-sighted
not to be aware that Mr. Stelling's standard of things was quite different, was certainly something
higher in the eyes of the world than that of the people he had been living amongst, and that,
brought in contact with it, he, Tom Tulliver, appeared uncouth and stupid; he was by no means
indifferent to this, and his pride got into an uneasy condition which quite nullified his boyish
self-satisfaction, and gave him something of the girl's susceptibility. He was a very firm,
not to say obstinate, disposition, but there was no brute-like rebellion and recklessness in
his nature; the human sensibilities predominated, and if it had occurred to him that he could
enable himself to show some quickness at his lessons, and so acquire Mr. Stelling's approbation,
by standing on one leg for an inconvenient length of time, or rapping his head moderately against
the wall, or any voluntary action of that sort, he would certainly have tried it. But no; Tom
had never heard that these measures would brighten the understanding, or strengthen the verbal
memory; and he was not given to hypothesis and experiment. It did occur to him that he could
perhaps get some help by praying for it; but as the prayers he said every evening were forms
learned by heart, he rather shrank from the novelty and irregularity of introducing an extempore
passage on a topic of petition for which he was not aware of any precedent. But one day, when
he had broken down, for the fifth time, in the supines of the third conjugation, and Mr. Stelling,
convinced that this must be carelessness, since it transcended the bounds of possible stupidity,
had lectured him very seriously, pointing out that if he failed to seize the present golden
opportunity of learning supines, he would have to regret it when he became a man,--Tom, more
miserable than usual, determined to try his sole resource; and that evening, after his usual
form of prayer for his parents and "little sister" (he had begun to pray for Maggie when she
was a baby), and that he might be able always to keep God's commandments, he added, in the
same low whisper, "and please to make me always remember my Latin." He paused a little to consider
how he should pray about Euclid--whether he should ask to see what it meant, or whether there
was any other mental state which would be more applicable to the case. But at last he added:
"And make Mr. Stelling say I sha'n't do Euclid any more. Amen."

The fact that he got through his supines without mistake the next day, encouraged him to persevere
in this appendix to his prayers, and neutralized any scepticism that might have arisen from
Mr. Stelling's continued demand for Euclid. But his faith broke down under the apparent absence
of all help when he got into the irregular verbs. It seemed clear that Tom's despair under
the caprices of the present tense did not constitute a nodus worthy of interference, and since
this was the climax of his difficulties, where was the use of praying for help any longer?
He made up his mind to this conclusion in one of his dull, lonely evenings, which he spent
in the study, preparing his lessons for the morrow. His eyes were apt to get dim over the page,
though he hated crying, and was ashamed of it; he couldn't help thinking with some affection
even of Spouncer, whom he used to fight and quarrel with; he would have felt at home with Spouncer,
and in a condition of superiority. And then the mill, and the river, and Yap pricking up his
ears, ready to obey the least sign when Tom said, "Hoigh!" would all come before him in a sort
of calenture, when his fingers played absently in his pocket with his great knife and his coil
of whipcord, and other relics of the past.

Tom, as I said, had never been so much like a girl in his life before, and at that epoch of
irregular verbs his spirit was further depressed by a new means of mental development which
had been thought of for him out of school hours. Mrs. Stelling had lately had her second baby,
and as nothing could be more salutary for a boy than to feel himself useful, Mrs. Stelling
considered she was doing Tom a service by setting him to watch the little cherub Laura while
the nurse was occupied with the sickly baby. It was quite a pretty employment for Tom to take
little Laura out in the sunniest hour of the autumn day; it would help to make him feel that
Lorton Parsonage was a home for him, and that he was one of the family. The little cherub Laura,
not being an accomplished walker at present, had a ribbon fastened round her waist, by which
Tom held her as if she had been a little dog during the minutes in which she chose to walk;
but as these were rare, he was for the most part carrying this fine child round and round the
garden, within sight of Mrs. Stelling's window, according to orders. If any one considers this
unfair and even oppressive toward Tom, I beg him to consider that there are feminine virtues
which are with difficulty combined, even if they are not incompatible. When the wife of a poor
curate contrives, under all her disadvantages, to dress extremely well, and to have a style
of coiffure which requires that her nurse shall occasionally officiate as lady's-maid; when,
moreover, her dinner-parties and her drawing-room show that effort at elegance and completeness
of appointment to which ordinary women might imagine a large income necessary, it would be
unreasonable to expect of her that she should employ a second nurse, or even act as a nurse
herself. Mr. Stelling knew better; he saw that his wife did wonders already, and was proud
of her. It was certainly not the best thing in the world for young Tulliver's gait to carry
a heavy child, but he had plenty of exercise in long walks with himself, and next half-year
Mr. Stelling would see about having a drilling-master. Among the many means whereby Mr. Stelling
intended to be more fortunate than the bulk of his fellow-men, he had entirely given up that
of having his own way in his own house. What then? He had married "as kind a little soul as
ever breathed," according to Mr. Riley, who had been acquainted with Mrs. Stelling's blond
ringlets and smiling demeanor throughout her maiden life, and on the strength of that knowledge
would have been ready any day to pronounce that whatever domestic differences might arise in
her married life must be entirely Mr. Stelling's fault.

If Tom had had a worse disposition, he would certainly have hated the little cherub Laura,
but he was too kind-hearted a lad for that; there was too much in him of the fibre that turns
to true manliness, and to protecting pity for the weak. I am afraid he hated Mrs. Stelling,
and contracted a lasting dislike to pale blond ringlets and broad plaits, as directly associated
with haughtiness of manner, and a frequent reference to other people's "duty." But he couldn't
help playing with little Laura, and liking to amuse her; he even sacrificed his percussion-caps
for her sake, in despair of their ever serving a greater purpose,--thinking the small flash
and bang would delight her, and thereby drawing down on himself a rebuke from Mrs. Stelling
for teaching her child to play with fire. Laura was a sort of playfellow--and oh, how Tom longed
for playfellows! In his secret heart he yearned to have Maggie with him, and was almost ready
to dote on her exasperating acts of forgetfulness; though, when he was at home, he always represented
it as a great favor on his part to let Maggie trot by his side on his pleasure excursions.

And before this dreary half-year was ended, Maggie actually came. Mrs. Stelling had given a
general invitation for the little girl to come and stay with her brother; so when Mr. Tulliver
drove over to King's Lorton late in October, Maggie came too, with the sense that she was taking
a great journey, and beginning to see the world. It was Mr. Tulliver's first visit to see Tom,
for the lad must learn not to think too much about home.

"Well, my lad," he said to Tom, when Mr. Stelling had left the room to announce the arrival
to his wife, and Maggie had begun to kiss Tom freely, "you look rarely! School agrees with you."

Tom wished he had looked rather ill.

"I don't think I am well, father," said Tom; "I wish you'd ask Mr. Stelling not to let me do
Euclid; it brings on the toothache, I think."

(The toothache was the only malady to which Tom had ever been subject.)

"Euclid, my lad,--why, what's that?" said Mr. Tulliver.

"Oh, I don't know; it's definitions, and axioms, and triangles, and things. It's a book I've
got to learn in--there's no sense in it."

"Go, go!" said Mr. Tulliver, reprovingly; "you mustn't say so. You must learn what your master
tells you. He knows what it's right for you to learn."

"I'll help you now, Tom," said Maggie, with a little air of patronizing consolation. "I'm come
to stay ever so long, if Mrs. Stelling asks me. I've brought my box and my pinafores, haven't
I, father?"

"You help me, you silly little thing!" said Tom, in such high spirits at this announcement
that he quite enjoyed the idea of confounding Maggie by showing her a page of Euclid. "I should
like to see you doing one of my lessons! Why, I learn Latin too! Girls never learn such things.
They're too silly."

"I know what Latin is very well," said Maggie, confidently, "Latin's a language. There are
Latin words in the Dictionary. There's bonus, a gift."

"Now, you're just wrong there, Miss Maggie!" said Tom, secretly astonished. "You think you're
very wise! But 'bonus' means 'good,' as it happens,--bonus, bona, bonum."

"Well, that's no reason why it shouldn't mean 'gift,'" said Maggie, stoutly. "It may mean several
things; almost every word does. There's 'lawn,'--it means the grass-plot, as well as the stuff
pocket- handkerchiefs are made of."

"Well done, little 'un," said Mr. Tulliver, laughing, while Tom felt rather disgusted with
Maggie's knowingness, though beyond measure cheerful at the thought that she was going to stay
with him. Her conceit would soon be overawed by the actual inspection of his books.

Mrs. Stelling, in her pressing invitation, did not mention a longer time than a week for Maggie's
stay; but Mr. Stelling, who took her between his knees, and asked her where she stole her dark
eyes from, insisted that she must stay a fortnight. Maggie thought Mr. Stelling was a charming
man, and Mr. Tulliver was quite proud to leave his little wench where she would have an opportunity
of showing her cleverness to appreciating strangers. So it was agreed that she should not be
fetched home till the end of the fortnight.

"Now, then, come with me into the study, Maggie," said Tom, as their father drove away. "What
do you shake and toss your head now for, you silly?" he continued; for though her hair was
now under a new dispensation, and was brushed smoothly behind her ears, she seemed still in
imagination to be tossing it out of her eyes. "It makes you look as if you were crazy."

"Oh, I can't help it," said Maggie, impatiently. "Don't tease me, Tom. Oh, what books!" she
exclaimed, as she saw the bookcases in the study. "How I should like to have as many books
as that!"

"Why, you couldn't read one of 'em," said Tom, triumphantly. "They're all Latin."

"No, they aren't," said Maggie. "I can read the back of this,--'History of the Decline and
Fall of the Roman Empire.'"

"Well, what does that mean? You don't know," said Tom, wagging his head.

"But I could soon find out," said Maggie, scornfully.

"Why, how?"

"I should look inside, and see what it was about."

"You'd better not, Miss Maggie," said Tom, seeing her hand on the volume. "Mr. Stelling lets
nobody touch his books without leave, and I shall catch it, if you take it out."

"Oh, very well. Let me see all your books, then," said Maggie, turning to throw her arms round
Tom's neck, and rub his cheek with her small round nose.

Tom, in the gladness of his heart at having dear old Maggie to dispute with and crow over again,
seized her round the waist, and began to jump with her round the large library table. Away
they jumped with more and more vigor, till Maggie's hair flew from behind her ears, and twirled
about like an animated mop. But the revolutions round the table became more and more irregular
in their sweep, till at last reaching Mr. Stelling's reading stand, they sent it thundering
down with its heavy lexicons to the floor. Happily it was the ground-floor, and the study was
a one-storied wing to the house, so that the downfall made no alarming resonance, though Tom
stood dizzy and aghast for a few minutes, dreading the appearance of Mr. or Mrs. Stelling.

"Oh, I say, Maggie," said Tom at last, lifting up the stand, "we must keep quiet here, you
know. If we break anything Mrs. Stelling'll make us cry peccavi."

"What's that?" said Maggie.

"Oh, it's the Latin for a good scolding," said Tom, not without some pride in his knowledge.

"Is she a cross woman?" said Maggie.

"I believe you!" said Tom, with an emphatic nod.

"I think all women are crosser than men," said Maggie. "Aunt Glegg's a great deal crosser than
uncle Glegg, and mother scolds me more than father does."

"Well, you'll be a woman some day," said Tom, "so you needn't talk."

"But I shall be a clever woman," said Maggie, with a toss.

"Oh, I dare say, and a nasty conceited thing. Everybody'll hate you."

"But you oughtn't to hate me, Tom; it'll be very wicked of you, for I shall be your sister."

"Yes, but if you're a nasty disagreeable thing I shall hate you."

"Oh, but, Tom, you won't! I sha'n't be disagreeable. I shall be very good to you, and I shall
be good to everybody. You won't hate me really, will you, Tom?"

"Oh, bother! never mind! Come, it's time for me to learn my lessons. See here! what I've got
to do," said Tom, drawing Maggie toward him and showing her his theorem, while she pushed her
hair behind her ears, and prepared herself to prove her capability of helping him in Euclid.
She began to read with full confidence in her own powers, but presently, becoming quite bewildered,
her face flushed with irritation. It was unavoidable; she must confess her incompetency, and
she was not fond of humiliation.

"It's nonsense!" she said, "and very ugly stuff; nobody need want to make it out."

"Ah, there, now, Miss Maggie!" said Tom, drawing the book away, and wagging his head at her,
"You see you're not so clever as you thought you were."

"Oh," said Maggie, pouting, "I dare say I could make it out, if I'd learned what goes before,
as you have."

"But that's what you just couldn't, Miss Wisdom," said Tom. "For it's all the harder when you
know what goes before; for then you've got to say what definition 3 is, and what axiom V. is.
But get along with you now; I must go on with this. Here's the Latin Grammar. See what you
can make of that."

Maggie found the Latin Grammar quite soothing after her mathematical mortification; for she
delighted in new words, and quickly found that there was an English Key at the end, which would
make her very wise about Latin, at slight expense. She presently made up her mind to skip the
rules in the Syntax, the examples became so absorbing. These mysterious sentences, snatched
from an unknown context,--like strange horns of beasts, and leaves of unknown plants, brought
from some far-off region,--gave boundless scope to her imagination, and were all the more fascinating
because they were in a peculiar tongue of their own, which she could learn to interpret. It
was really very interesting, the Latin Grammar that Tom had said no girls could learn; and
she was proud because she found it interesting. The most fragmentary examples were her favourites.
Mors omnibus est communis would have been jejune, only she liked to know the Latin; but the
fortunate gentleman whom every one congratulated because he had a son "endowed with such a
disposition" afforded her a great deal of pleasant conjecture, and she was quite lost in the
"thick grove penetrable by no star," when Tom called out,--

"Now, then, Magsie, give us the Grammar!"

"Oh, Tom, it's such a pretty book!" she said, as she jumped out of the large arm-chair to give
it him; "it's much prettier than the Dictionary. I could learn Latin very soon. I don't think
it's at all hard."

"Oh, I know what you've been doing," said Tom; "you've been reading the English at the end.
Any donkey can do that."

Tom seized the book and opened it with a determined and business-like air, as much as to say
that he had a lesson to learn which no donkeys would find themselves equal to. Maggie, rather
piqued, turned to the bookcases to amuse herself with puzzling out the titles.

Presently Tom called to her: "Here, Magsie, come and hear if I can say this. Stand at that
end of the table, where Mr. Stelling sits when he hears me."

Maggie obeyed, and took the open book.

"Where do you begin, Tom?"

"Oh, I begin at 'Appellativa arborum,' because I say all over again what I've been learning
this week."

Tom sailed along pretty well for three lines; and Maggie was beginning to forget her office
of prompter in speculating as to what mas could mean, which came twice over, when he stuck
fast at Sunt etiam volucrum.

"Don't tell me, Maggie; Sunt etiam volucrum--Sunt etiam volucrum--ut ostrea, cetus----"

"No," said Maggie, opening her mouth and shaking her head.

"Sunt etiam volucrum," said Tom, very slowly, as if the next words might be expected to come
sooner when he gave them this strong hint that they were waited for.

"C, e, u," said Maggie, getting impatient.

"Oh, I know--hold your tongue," said Tom. "Ceu passer, hirundo; Ferarum--ferarum----" Tom took
his pencil and made several hard dots with it on his book-cover--"ferarum----"

"Oh dear, oh dear, Tom," said Maggie, "what a time you are! Ut----"

"Ut ostrea----"

"No, no," said Maggie, "ut tigris----"

"Oh yes, now I can do," said Tom; "it was tigris, vulpes, I'd forgotten: ut tigris, volupes;
et Piscium."

With some further stammering and repetition, Tom got through the next few lines.

"Now, then," he said, "the next is what I've just learned for to-morrow. Give me hold of the
book a minute."

After some whispered gabbling, assisted by the beating of his fist on the table, Tom returned
the book.

"Mascula nomina in a," he began.

"No, Tom," said Maggie, "that doesn't come next. It's Nomen non creskens genittivo----"

"Creskens genittivo!" exclaimed Tom, with a derisive laugh, for Tom had learned this omitted
passage for his yesterday's lesson, and a young gentleman does not require an intimate or extensive
acquaintance with Latin before he can feel the pitiable absurdity of a false quantity. "Creskens
genittivo! What a little silly you are, Maggie!"

"Well, you needn't laugh, Tom, for you didn't remember it at all. I'm sure it's spelt so; how
was I to know?"

"Phee-e-e-h! I told you girls couldn't learn Latin. It's Nomen non crescens genitivo."

"Very well, then," said Maggie, pouting. I can say that as well as you can. And you don't mind
your stops. For you ought to stop twice as long at a semicolon as you do at a comma, and you
make the longest stops where there ought to be no stop at all."

"Oh, well, don't chatter. Let me go on."

They were presently fetched to spend the rest of the evening in the drawing-room, and Maggie
became so animated with Mr. Stelling, who, she felt sure, admired her cleverness, that Tom
was rather amazed and alarmed at her audacity. But she was suddenly subdued by Mr. Stelling's
alluding to a little girl of whom he had heard that she once ran away to the gypsies.

"What a very odd little girl that must be!" said Mrs. Stelling, meaning to be playful; but
a playfulness that turned on her supposed oddity was not at all to Maggie's taste. She feared
that Mr. Stelling, after all, did not think much of her, and went to bed in rather low spirits.
Mrs. Stelling, she felt, looked at her as if she thought her hair was very ugly because it
hung down straight behind.

Nevertheless it was a very happy fortnight to Maggie, this visit to Tom. She was allowed to
be in the study while he had his lessons, and in her various readings got very deep into the
examples in the Latin Grammar. The astronomer who hated women generally caused her so much
puzzling speculation that she one day asked Mr. Stelling if all astronomers hated women, or
whether it was only this particular astronomer. But forestalling his answer, she said,--

"I suppose it's all astronomers; because, you know, they live up in high towers, and if the
women came there they might talk and hinder them from looking at the stars."

Mr. Stelling liked her prattle immensely, and they were on the best terms. She told Tom she
should like to go to school to Mr. Stelling, as he did, and learn just the same things. She
knew she could do Euclid, for she had looked into it again, and she saw what A B C meant; they
were the names of the lines.

"I'm sure you couldn't do it, now," said Tom; "and I'll just ask Mr. Stelling if you could."

"I don't mind," said the little conceited minx, "I'll ask him myself."

"Mr. Stelling," she said, that same evening when they were in the drawing-room, "couldn't I
do Euclid, and all Tom's lessons, if you were to teach me instead of him?"

"No, you couldn't," said Tom, indignantly. "Girls can't do Euclid; can they, sir?"

"They can pick up a little of everything, I dare say," said Mr. Stelling. "They've a great
deal of superficial cleverness; but they couldn't go far into anything. They're quick and shallow."

Tom, delighted with this verdict, telegraphed his triumph by wagging his head at Maggie, behind
Mr. Stelling's chair. As for Maggie, she had hardly ever been so mortified. She had been so
proud to be called "quick" all her little life, and now it appeared that this quickness was
the brand of inferiority. It would have been better to be slow, like Tom.

"Ha, ha! Miss Maggie!" said Tom, when they were alone; "you see it's not such a fine thing
to be quick. You'll never go far into anything, you know."

And Maggie was so oppressed by this dreadful destiny that she had no spirit for a retort.

But when this small apparatus of shallow quickness was fetched away in the gig by Luke, and
the study was once more quite lonely for Tom, he missed her grievously. He had really been
brighter, and had got through his lessons better, since she had been there; and she had asked
Mr. Stelling so many questions about the Roman Empire, and whether there really ever was a
man who said, in Latin, "I would not buy it for a farthing or a rotten nut," or whether that
had only been turned into Latin, that Tom had actually come to a dim understanding of the fact
that there had once been people upon the earth who were so fortunate as to know Latin without
learning it through the medium of the Eton Grammar. This luminous idea was a great addition
to his historical acquirements during this half-year, which were otherwise confined to an epitomized
history of the Jews.

But the dreary half-year did come to an end. How glad Tom was to see the last yellow leaves
fluttering before the cold wind! The dark afternoons and the first December snow seemed to
him far livelier than the August sunshine; and that he might make himself the surer about the
flight of the days that were carrying him homeward, he stuck twenty-one sticks deep in a corner
of the garden, when he was three weeks from the holidays, and pulled one up every day with
a great wrench, throwing it to a distance with a vigor of will which would have carried it
to limbo, if it had been in the nature of sticks to travel so far.

But it was worth purchasing, even at the heavy price of the Latin Grammar, the happiness of
seeing the bright light in the parlor at home, as the gig passed noiselessly over the snow-covered
bridge; the happiness of passing from the cold air to the warmth and the kisses and the smiles
of that familiar hearth, where the pattern of the rug and the grate and the fire-irons were
"first ideas" that it was no more possible to criticise than the solidity and extension of
matter. There is no sense of ease like the ease we felt in those scenes where we were born,
where objects became dear to us before we had known the labor of choice, and where the outer
world seemed only an extension of our own personality; we accepted and loved it as we accepted
our own sense of existence and our own limbs. Very commonplace, even ugly, that furniture of
our early home might look if it were put up to auction; an improved taste in upholstery scorns
it; and is not the striving after something better and better in our surroundings the grand
characteristic that distinguishes man from the brute, or, to satisfy a scrupulous accuracy
of definition, that distinguishes the British man from the foreign brute? But heaven knows
where that striving might lead us, if our affections had not a trick of twining round those
old inferior things; if the loves and sanctities of our life had no deep immovable roots in
memory. One's delight in an elderberry bush overhanging the confused leafage of a hedgerow
bank, as a more gladdening sight than the finest cistus or fuchsia spreading itself on the
softest undulating turf, is an entirely unjustifiable preference to a nursery-gardener, or
to any of those regulated minds who are free from the weakness of any attachment that does
not rest on a demonstrable superiority of qualities. And there is no better reason for preferring
this elderberry bush than that it stirs an early memory; that it is no novelty in my life,
speaking to me merely through my present sensibilities to form and color, but the long companion
of my existence, that wove itself into my joys when joys were vivid.

Chapter II

The Christmas Holidays

Fine old Christmas, with the snowy hair and ruddy face, had done his duty that year in the
noblest fashion, and had set off his rich gifts of warmth and color with all the heightening
contrast of frost and snow.

Snow lay on the croft and river-bank in undulations softer than the limbs of infancy; it lay
with the neatliest finished border on every sloping roof, making the dark-red gables stand
out with a new depth of color; it weighed heavily on the laurels and fir-trees, till it fell
from them with a shuddering sound; it clothed the rough turnip-field with whiteness, and made
the sheep look like dark blotches; the gates were all blocked up with the sloping drifts, and
here and there a disregarded four-footed beast stood as if petrified "in unrecumbent sadness";
there was no gleam, no shadow, for the heavens, too, were one still, pale cloud; no sound or
motion in anything but the dark river that flowed and moaned like an unresting sorrow. But
old Christmas smiled as he laid this cruel-seeming spell on the outdoor world, for he meant
to light up home with new brightness, to deepen all the richness of indoor color, and give
a keener edge of delight to the warm fragrance of food; he meant to prepare a sweet imprisonment
that would strengthen the primitive fellowship of kindred, and make the sunshine of familiar
human faces as welcome as the hidden day-star. His kindness fell but hardly on the homeless,--fell
but hardly on the homes where the hearth was not very warm, and where the food had little fragrance;
where the human faces had had no sunshine in them, but rather the leaden, blank-eyed gaze of
unexpectant want. But the fine old season meant well; and if he has not learned the secret
how to bless men impartially, it is because his father Time, with ever-unrelenting unrelenting
purpose, still hides that secret in his own mighty, slow-beating heart.

And yet this Christmas day, in spite of Tom's fresh delight in home, was not, he thought, somehow
or other, quite so happy as it had always been before. The red berries were just as abundant
on the holly, and he and Maggie had dressed all the windows and mantlepieces and picture-frames
on Christmas eve with as much taste as ever, wedding the thick-set scarlet clusters with branches
of the black-berried ivy. There had been singing under the windows after midnight,--supernatural
singing, Maggie always felt, in spite of Tom's contemptuous insistence that the singers were
old Patch, the parish clerk, and the rest of the church choir; she trembled with awe when their
carolling broke in upon her dreams, and the image of men in fustian clothes was always thrust
away by the vision of angels resting on the parted cloud. The midnight chant had helped as
usual to lift the morning above the level of common days; and then there were the smell of
hot toast and ale from the kitchen, at the breakfast hour; the favorite anthem, the green boughs,
and the short sermon gave the appropriate festal character to the church-going; and aunt and
uncle Moss, with all their seven children, were looking like so many reflectors of the bright
parlor-fire, when the church-goers came back, stamping the snow from their feet. The plum-pudding
was of the same handsome roundness as ever, and came in with the symbolic blue flames around
it, as if it had been heroically snatched from the nether fires, into which it had been thrown
by dyspeptic Puritans; the dessert was as splendid as ever, with its golden oranges, brown
nuts, and the crystalline light and dark of apple-jelly and damson cheese; in all these things
Christmas was as it had always been since Tom could remember; it was only distinguished, it
by anything, by superior sliding and snowballs.

Christmas was cheery, but not so Mr. Tulliver. He was irate and defiant; and Tom, though he
espoused his father's quarrels and shared his father's sense of injury, was not without some
of the feeling that oppressed Maggie when Mr. Tulliver got louder and more angry in narration
and assertion with the increased leisure of dessert. The attention that Tom might have concentrated
on his nuts and wine was distracted by a sense that there were rascally enemies in the world,
and that the business of grown-up life could hardly be conducted without a good deal of quarrelling.
Now, Tom was not fond of quarrelling, unless it could soon be put an end to by a fair stand-up
fight with an adversary whom he had every chance of thrashing; and his father's irritable talk
made him uncomfortable, though he never accounted to himself for the feeling, or conceived
the notion that his father was faulty in this respect.

The particular embodiment of the evil principle now exciting Mr. Tulliver's determined resistance
was Mr. Pivart, who, having lands higher up the Ripple, was taking measures for their irrigation,
which either were, or would be, or were bound to be (on the principle that water was water),
an infringement on Mr. Tulliver's legitimate share of water-power. Dix, who had a mill on the
stream, was a feeble auxiliary of Old Harry compared with Pivart. Dix had been brought to his
senses by arbitration, and Wakem's advice had not carried him far. No; Dix, Mr. Tulliver considered,
had been as good as nowhere in point of law; and in the intensity of his indignation against
Pivart, his contempt for a baffled adversary like Dix began to wear the air of a friendly attachment.
He had no male audience to-day except Mr. Moss, who knew nothing, as he said, of the "natur'
o' mills," and could only assent to Mr. Tulliver's arguments on the a priori ground of family
relationship and monetary obligation; but Mr. Tulliver did not talk with the futile intention
of convincing his audience, he talked to relieve himself; while good Mr. Moss made strong efforts
to keep his eyes wide open, in spite of the sleepiness which an unusually good dinner produced
in his hard-worked frame. Mrs. Moss, more alive to the subject, and interested in everything
that affected her brother, listened and put in a word as often as maternal preoccupations allowed.

"Why, Pivart's a new name hereabout, brother, isn't it?" she said; "he didn't own the land
in father's time, nor yours either, before I was married."

"New name? Yes, I should think it is a new name," said Mr. Tulliver, with angry emphasis. "Dorlcote
Mill's been in our family a hundred year and better, and nobody ever heard of a Pivart meddling
with the river, till this fellow came and bought Bincome's farm out of hand, before anybody
else could so much as say 'snap.' But I'll Pivart him!" added Mr. Tulliver, lifting his glass
with a sense that he had defined his resolution in an unmistakable manner.

"You won't be forced to go to law with him, I hope, brother?" said Mrs. Moss, with some anxiety.

"I don't know what I shall be forced to; but I know what I shall force him to, with his dikes
and erigations, if there's any law to be brought to bear o' the right side. I know well enough
who's at the bottom of it; he's got Wakem to back him and egg him on. I know Wakem tells him
the law can't touch him for it, but there's folks can handle the law besides Wakem. It takes
a big raskil to beat him; but there's bigger to be found, as know more o' th' ins and outs
o' the law, else how came Wakem to lose Brumley's suit for him?"

Mr. Tulliver was a strictly honest man, and proud of being honest, but he considered that in
law the ends of justice could only be achieved by employing a stronger knave to frustrate a
weaker. Law was a sort of cock-fight, in which it was the business of injured honesty to get
a game bird with the best pluck and the strongest spurs.

"Gore's no fool; you needn't tell me that," he observed presently, in a pugnacious tone, as
if poor Gritty had been urging that lawyer's capabilities; "but, you see, he isn't up to the
law as Wakem is. And water's a very particular thing; you can't pick it up with a pitchfork.
That's why it's been nuts to Old Harry and the lawyers. It's plain enough what's the rights
and the wrongs of water, if you look at it straight-forrard; for a river's a river, and if
you've got a mill, you must have water to turn it; and it's no use telling me Pivart's erigation
and nonsense won't stop my wheel; I know what belongs to water better than that. Talk to me
o' what th' engineers say! I say it's common sense, as Pivart's dikes must do me an injury.
But if that's their engineering, I'll put Tom to it by-and-by, and he shall see if he can't
find a bit more sense in th' engineering business than what that comes to."

Tom, looking round with some anxiety at this announcement of his prospects, unthinkingly withdrew
a small rattle he was amusing baby Moss with, whereupon she, being a baby that knew her own
mind with remarkable clearness, instantaneously expressed her sentiments in a piercing yell,
and was not to be appeased even by the restoration of the rattle, feeling apparently that the
original wrong of having it taken from her remained in all its force. Mrs. Moss hurried away
with her into another room, and expressed to Mrs. Tulliver, who accompanied her, the conviction
that the dear child had good reasons for crying; implying that if it was supposed to be the
rattle that baby clamored for, she was a misunderstood baby. The thoroughly justifiable yell
being quieted, Mrs. Moss looked at her sister-in-law and said,--

"I'm sorry to see brother so put out about this water work."

"It's your brother's way, Mrs. Moss; I'd never anything o' that sort before I was married,"
said Mrs. Tulliver, with a half-implied reproach. She always spoke of her husband as "your
brother" to Mrs. Moss in any case when his line of conduct was not matter of pure admiration.
Amiable Mrs. Tulliver, who was never angry in her life, had yet her mild share of that spirit
without which she could hardly have been at once a Dodson and a woman. Being always on the
defensive toward her own sisters, it was natural that she should be keenly conscious of her
superiority, even as the weakest Dodson, over a husband's sister, who, besides being poorly
off, and inclined to "hang on" her brother, had the good-natured submissiveness of a large,
easy-tempered, untidy, prolific woman, with affection enough in her not only for her own husband
and abundant children, but for any number of collateral relations.

"I hope and pray he won't go to law," said Mrs. Moss, "for there's never any knowing where
that'll end. And the right doesn't allays win. This Mr. Pivart's a rich man, by what I can
make out, and the rich mostly get things their own way."

"As to that," said Mrs. Tulliver, stroking her dress down, "I've seen what riches are in my
own family; for my sisters have got husbands as can afford to do pretty much what they like.
But I think sometimes I shall be drove off my head with the talk about this law and erigation;
and my sisters lay all the fault to me, for they don't know what it is to marry a man like
your brother; how should they? Sister Pullet has her own way from morning till night."

"Well," said Mrs. Moss, "I don't think I should like my husband if he hadn't got any wits of
his own, and I had to find head-piece for him. It's a deal easier to do what pleases one's
husband, than to be puzzling what else one should do."

"If people come to talk o' doing what pleases their husbands," said Mrs. Tulliver, with a faint
imitation of her sister Glegg, "I'm sure your brother might have waited a long while before
he'd have found a wife that 'ud have let him have his say in everything, as I do. It's nothing
but law and erigation now, from when we first get up in the morning till we go to bed at night;
and I never contradict him; I only say, 'Well, Mr. Tulliver, do as you like; but whativer you
do, don't go to law."

Mrs. Tulliver, as we have seen, was not without influence over her husband. No woman is; she
can always incline him to do either what she wishes, or the reverse; and on the composite impulses
that were threatening to hurry Mr. Tulliver into "law," Mrs. Tulliver's monotonous pleading
had doubtless its share of force; it might even be comparable to that proverbial feather which
has the credit or discredit of breaking the camel's back; though, on a strictly impartial view,
the blame ought rather to lie with the previous weight of feathers which had already placed
the back in such imminent peril that an otherwise innocent feather could not settle on it without
mischief. Not that Mrs. Tulliver's feeble beseeching could have had this feather's weight in
virtue of her single personality; but whenever she departed from entire assent to her husband,
he saw in her the representative of the Dodson family; and it was a guiding principle with
Mr. Tulliver to let the Dodsons know that they were not to domineer over him, or--more specifically--that
a male Tulliver was far more than equal to four female Dodsons, even though one of them was
Mrs. Glegg.

But not even a direct argument from that typical Dodson female herself against his going to
law could have heightened his disposition toward it so much as the mere thought of Wakem, continually
freshened by the sight of the too able attorney on market-days. Wakem, to his certain knowledge,
was (metaphorically speaking) at the bottom of Pivart's irrigation; Wakem had tried to make
Dix stand out, and go to law about the dam; it was unquestionably Wakem who had caused Mr.
Tulliver to lose the suit about the right of road and the bridge that made a thoroughfare of
his land for every vagabond who preferred an opportunity of damaging private property to walking
like an honest man along the highroad; all lawyers were more or less rascals, but Wakem's rascality
was of that peculiarly aggravated kind which placed itself in opposition to that form of right
embodied in Mr. Tulliver's interests and opinions. And as an extra touch of bitterness, the
injured miller had recently, in borrowing the five hundred pounds, been obliged to carry a
little business to Wakem's office on his own account. A hook-nosed glib fellow! as cool as
a cucumber,--always looking so sure of his game! And it was vexatious that Lawyer Gore was
not more like him, but was a bald, round-featured man, with bland manners and fat hands; a
game-cock that you would be rash to bet upon against Wakem. Gore was a sly fellow. His weakness
did not lie on the side of scrupulosity; but the largest amount of winking, however significant,
is not equivalent to seeing through a stone wall; and confident as Mr. Tulliver was in his
principle that water was water, and in the direct inference that Pivart had not a leg to stand
on in this affair of irrigation, he had an uncomfortable suspicion that Wakem had more law
to show against this (rationally) irrefragable inference than Gore could show for it. But then,
if they went to law, there was a chance for Mr. Tulliver to employ Counsellor Wylde on his
side, instead of having that admirable bully against him; and the prospect of seeing a witness
of Wakem's made to perspire and become confounded, as Mr. Tulliver's witness had once been,
was alluring to the love of retributive justice.

Much rumination had Mr. Tulliver on these puzzling subjects during his rides on the gray horse;
much turning of the head from side to side, as the scales dipped alternately; but the probable
result was still out of sight, only to be reached through much hot argument and iteration in
domestic and social life. That initial stage of the dispute which consisted in the narration
of the case and the enforcement of Mr. Tulliver's views concerning it throughout the entire
circle of his connections would necessarily take time; and at the beginning of February, when
Tom was going to school again, there were scarcely any new items to be detected in his father's
statement of the case against Pivart, or any more specific indication of the measures he was
bent on taking against that rash contravener of the principle that water was water. Iteration,
like friction, is likely to generate heat instead of progress, and Mr. Tulliver's heat was
certainly more and more palpable. If there had been no new evidence on any other point, there
had been new evidence that Pivart was as "thick as mud" with Wakem.

"Father," said Tom, one evening near the end of the holidays, "uncle Glegg says Lawyer Wakem
is going to send his son to Mr. Stelling. It isn't true, what they said about his going to
be sent to France. You won't like me to go to school with Wakem's son, shall you?"

"It's no matter for that, my boy," said Mr. Tulliver; "don't you learn anything bad of him,
that's all. The lad's a poor deformed creatur, and takes after his mother in the face; I think
there isn't much of his father in him. It's a sign Wakem thinks high o' Mr. Sterling, as he
sends his son to him, and Wakem knows meal from bran."

Mr. Tulliver in his heart was rather proud of the fact that his son was to have the same advantages
as Wakem's; but Tom was not at all easy on the point. It would have been much clearer if the
lawyer's son had not been deformed, for then Tom would have had the prospect of pitching into
him with all that freedom which is derived from a high moral sanction.

Chapter III

The New Schoolfellow

It was a cold, wet January day on which Tom went back to school; a day quite in keeping with
this severe phase of his destiny. If he had not carried in his pocket a parcel of sugar-candy
and a small Dutch doll for little Laura, there would have been no ray of expected pleasure
to enliven the general gloom. But he liked to think how Laura would put out her lips and her
tiny hands for the bits of sugarcandy; and to give the greater keenness to these pleasures
of imagination, he took out the parcel, made a small hole in the paper, and bit off a crystal
or two, which had so solacing an effect under the confined prospect and damp odors of the gig-umbrella,
that he repeated the process more than once on his way.

"Well, Tulliver, we're glad to see you again," said Mr. Stelling, heartily. "Take off your
wrappings and come into the study till dinner. You'll find a bright fire there, and a new companion."

Tom felt in an uncomfortable flutter as he took off his woollen comforter and other wrappings.
He had seen Philip Wakem at St. Ogg's, but had always turned his eyes away from him as quickly
as possible. He would have disliked having a deformed boy for his companion, even if Philip
had not been the son of a bad man. And Tom did not see how a bad man's son could be very good.
His own father was a good man, and he would readily have fought any one who said the contrary.
He was in a state of mingled embarrassment and defiance as he followed Mr. Stelling to the study.

"Here is a new companion for you to shake hands with, Tulliver," said that gentleman on entering
the study,--"Master Philip Wakem. I shall leave you to make acquaintance by yourselves. You
already know something of each other, I imagine; for you are neighbors at home."

Tom looked confused and awkward, while Philip rose and glanced at him timidly. Tom did not
like to go up and put out his hand, and he was not prepared to say, "How do you do?" on so
short a notice.

Mr. Stelling wisely turned away, and closed the door behind him; boys' shyness only wears off
in the absence of their elders.

Philip was at once too proud and too timid to walk toward Tom. He thought, or rather felt,
that Tom had an aversion to looking at him; every one, almost, disliked looking at him; and
his deformity was more conspicuous when he walked. So they remained without shaking hands or
even speaking, while Tom went to the fire and warmed himself, every now and then casting furtive
glances at Philip, who seemed to be drawing absently first one object and then another on a
piece of paper he had before him. He had seated himself again, and as he drew, was thinking
what he could say to Tom, and trying to overcome his own repugnance to making the first advances.

Tom began to look oftener and longer at Philip's face, for he could see it without noticing
the hump, and it was really not a disagreeable face,--very old-looking, Tom thought. He wondered
how much older Philip was than himself. An anatomist--even a mere physiognomist-- would have
seen that the deformity of Philip's spine was not a congenital hump, but the result of an accident
in infancy; but you do not expect from Tom any acquaintance with such distinctions; to him,
Philip was simply a humpback. He had a vague notion that the deformity of Wakem's son had some
relation to the lawyer's rascality, of which he had so often heard his father talk with hot
emphasis; and he felt, too, a half-admitted fear of him as probably a spiteful fellow, who,
not being able to fight you, had cunning ways of doing you a mischief by the sly. There was
a humpbacked tailor in the neighborhood of Mr. Jacobs's academy, who was considered a very
unamiable character, and was much hooted after by public-spirited boys solely on the ground
of his unsatisfactory moral qualities; so that Tom was not without a basis of fact to go upon.
Still, no face could be more unlike that ugly tailor's than this melancholy boy's face,--the
brown hair round it waved and curled at the ends like a girl's; Tom thought that truly pitiable.
This Wakem was a pale, puny fellow, and it was quite clear he would not be able to play at
anything worth speaking of; but he handled his pencil in an enviable manner, and was apparently
making one thing after another without any trouble. What was he drawing? Tom was quite warm
now, and wanted something new to be going forward. It was certainly more agreeable to have
an ill-natured humpback as a companion than to stand looking out of the study window at the
rain, and kicking his foot against the washboard in solitude; something would happen every
day,-- "a quarrel or something"; and Tom thought he should rather like to show Philip that
he had better not try his spiteful tricks on him. He suddenly walked across the hearth and
looked over Philip's paper.

"Why, that's a donkey with panniers, and a spaniel, and partridges in the corn!" he exclaimed,
his tongue being completely loosed by surprise and admiration. "Oh my buttons! I wish I could
draw like that. I'm to learn drawing this half; I wonder if I shall learn to make dogs and
donkeys!"

"Oh, you can do them without learning," said Philip; "I never learned drawing."

"Never learned?" said Tom, in amazement. "Why, when I make dogs and horses, and those things,
the heads and the legs won't come right; though I can see how they ought to be very well. I
can make houses, and all sorts of chimneys,--chimneys going all down the wall,--and windows
in the roof, and all that. But I dare say I could do dogs and horses if I was to try more,"
he added, reflecting that Philip might falsely suppose that he was going to "knock under,"
if he were too frank about the imperfection of his accomplishments.

"Oh, yes," said Philip, "it's very easy. You've only to look well at things, and draw them
over and over again. What you do wrong once, you can alter the next time."

"But haven't you been taught anything?" said Tom, beginning to have a puzzled suspicion that
Philip's crooked back might be the source of remarkable faculties. "I thought you'd been to
school a long while."

"Yes," said Philip, smiling; "I've been taught Latin and Greek and mathematics, and writing
and such things."

"Oh, but I say, you don't like Latin, though, do you?" said Tom, lowering his voice confidentially.

"Pretty well; I don't care much about it," said Philip.

"Ah, but perhaps you haven't got into the Propria quæ maribus," said Tom, nodding his head
sideways, as much as to say, "that was the test; it was easy talking till you came to that."

Philip felt some bitter complacency in the promising stupidity of this well-made, active-looking
boy; but made polite by his own extreme sensitiveness, as well as by his desire to conciliate,
he checked his inclination to laugh, and said quietly,--

"I've done with the grammar; I don't learn that any more."

"Then you won't have the same lessons as I shall?" said Tom, with a sense of disappointment.

"No; but I dare say I can help you. I shall be very glad to help you if I can."

Tom did not say "Thank you," for he was quite absorbed in the thought that Wakem's son did
not seem so spiteful a fellow as might have been expected.

"I say," he said presently, "do you love your father?"

"Yes," said Philip, coloring deeply; "don't you love yours?"

"Oh yes--I only wanted to know," said Tom, rather ashamed of himself, now he saw Philip coloring
and looking uncomfortable. He found much difficulty in adjusting his attitude of mind toward
the son of Lawyer Wakem, and it had occurred to him that if Philip disliked his father, that
fact might go some way toward clearing up his perplexity.

"Shall you learn drawing now?" he said, by way of changing the subject.

"No," said Philip. "My father wishes me to give all my time to other things now."

"What! Latin and Euclid, and those things?" said Tom.

"Yes," said Philip, who had left off using his pencil, and was resting his head on one hand,
while Tom was learning forward on both elbows, and looking with increasing admiration at the
dog and the donkey.

"And you don't mind that?" said Tom, with strong curiosity.

"No; I like to know what everybody else knows. I can study what I like by-and-by."

"I can't think why anybody should learn Latin," said Tom. "It's no good."

"It's part of the education of a gentleman," said Philip. "All gentlemen learn the same things."

"What! do you think Sir John Crake, the master of the harriers, knows Latin?" said Tom, who
had often thought he should like to resemble Sir John Crake.

"He learned it when he was a boy, of course," said Philip. "But I dare say he's forgotten it."

"Oh, well, I can do that, then," said Tom, not with any epigrammatic intention, but with serious
satisfaction at the idea that, as far as Latin was concerned, there was no hindrance to his
resembling Sir John Crake. "Only you're obliged to remember it while you're at school, else
you've got to learn ever so many lines of 'Speaker.' Mr. Stelling's very particular--did you
know? He'll have you up ten times if you say 'nam' for 'jam,'--he won't let you go a letter
wrong, I can tell you."

"Oh, I don't mind," said Philip, unable to choke a laugh; "I can remember things easily. And
there are some lessons I'm very fond of. I'm very fond of Greek history, and everything about
the Greeks. I should like to have been a Greek and fought the Persians, and then have come
home and have written tragedies, or else have been listened to by everybody for my wisdom,
like Socrates, and have died a grand death." (Philip, you perceive, was not without a wish
to impress the well-made barbarian with a sense of his mental superiority.)

"Why, were the Greeks great fighters?" said Tom, who saw a vista in this direction. "Is there
anything like David and Goliath and Samson in the Greek history? Those are the only bits I
like in the history of the Jews."

"Oh, there are very fine stories of that sort about the Greeks,--about the heroes of early
times who killed the wild beasts, as Samson did. And in the Odyssey--that's a beautiful poem--there's
a more wonderful giant than Goliath,--Polypheme, who had only one eye in the middle of his
forehead; and Ulysses, a little fellow, but very wise and cunning, got a red-hot pine-tree
and stuck it into this one eye, and made him roar like a thousand bulls."

"Oh, what fun!" said Tom, jumping away from the table, and stamping first with one leg and
then the other. "I say, can you tell me all about those stories? Because I sha'n't learn Greek,
you know. Shall I?" he added, pausing in his stamping with a sudden alarm, lest the contrary
might be possible. "Does every gentleman learn Greek? Will Mr. Stelling make me begin with
it, do you think?"

"No, I should think not, very likely not," said Philip. "But you may read those stories without
knowing Greek. I've got them in English."

"Oh, but I don't like reading; I'd sooner have you tell them me. But only the fighting ones,
you know. My sister Maggie is always wanting to tell me stories, but they're stupid things.
Girls' stories always are. Can you tell a good many fighting stories?"

"Oh yes," said Philip; "lots of them, besides the Greek stories. I can tell you about Richard
Cœur-de-Lion and Saladin, and about William Wallace and Robert Bruce and James Douglas,--I
know no end."

"You're older than I am, aren't you?" said Tom.

"Why, how old are you? I'm fifteen."

"I'm only going in fourteen," said Tom. "But I thrashed all the fellows at Jacob's--that's
where I was before I came here. And I beat 'em all at bandy and climbing. And I wish Mr. Stelling
would let us go fishing. I could show you how to fish. You could fish, couldn't you? It's only
standing, and sitting still, you know."

Tom, in his turn, wished to make the balance dip in his favor. This hunchback must not suppose
that his acquaintance with fighting stories put him on a par with an actual fighting hero,
like Tom Tulliver. Philip winced under this allusion to his unfitness for active sports, and
he answered almost peevishly,--

"I can't bear fishing. I think people look like fools sitting watching a line hour after hour,
or else throwing and throwing, and catching nothing."

"Ah, but you wouldn't say they looked like fools when they landed a big pike, I can tell you,"
said Tom, who had never caught anything that was "big" in his life, but whose imagination was
on the stretch with indignant zeal for the honor of sport. Wakem's son, it was plain, had his
disagreeable points, and must be kept in due check. Happily for the harmony of this first interview,
they were now called to dinner, and Philip was not allowed to develop farther his unsound views
on the subject of fishing. But Tom said to himself, that was just what he should have expected
from a hunchback.

Chapter IV

"The Young Idea"

The alterations of feeling in that first dialogue between Tom and Philip continued to make
their intercourse even after many weeks of schoolboy intimacy. Tom never quite lost the feeling
that Philip, being the son of a "rascal," was his natural enemy; never thoroughly overcame
his repulsion to Philip's deformity. He was a boy who adhered tenaciously to impressions once
received; as with all minds in which mere perception predominates over thought and emotion,
the external remained to him rigidly what it was in the first instance. But then it was impossible
not to like Philip's company when he was in a good humor; he could help one so well in one's
Latin exercises, which Tom regarded as a kind of puzzle that could only be found out by a lucky
chance; and he could tell such wonderful fighting stories about Hal of the Wynd, for example,
and other heroes who were especial favorites with Tom, because they laid about them with heavy
strokes. He had small opinion of Saladin, whose cimeter could cut a cushion in two in an instant;
who wanted to cut cushions? That was a stupid story, and he didn't care to hear it again. But
when Robert Bruce, on the black pony, rose in his stirrups, and lifting his good battle-axe,
cracked at once the helmet and the skull of the too hasty knight at Bannockburn, then Tom felt
all the exaltation of sympathy, and if he had had a cocoanut at hand, he would have cracked
it at once with the poker. Philip in his happier moods indulged Tom to the top of his bent,
heightening the crash and bang and fury of every fight with all the artillery of epithets and
similes at his command. But he was not always in a good humor or happy mood. The slight spurt
of peevish susceptibility which had escaped him in their first interview was a symptom of a
perpetually recurring mental ailment, half of it nervous irritability, half of it the heart-bitterness
produced by the sense of his deformity. Equally, to be heard by the Divine, is precisely to listen
to it, and to be favoured by it, is the same as to offer to it; for from the one immoveable
and the same, proceed thoughts uncertain and certain, desires ardent and appeased, and reasonings
valid and vain, according as the man worthily or unworthily puts them before himself, with the
intellect, the affections and actions. As that same pilot may be said to be the cause of the sinking
or of the safety of the ship, according as he is present in it or absent from it; with this difference,
that the pilot through his defectiveness or his efficiency ruins
or saves the ship; but the Divine potency which is all in all does
not proffer or withhold except through assimilation or rejection by
oneself.[H]

[H] Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall
find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.--("St. Matthew.")

VII.

MAR. It seems to me that the following figure is closely connected and linked with the above;
there are two stars in the form of two radiant eyes, with the legend: Mors et vita.

CES. Read the sonnet!

MAR. I will do so:

47.

Writ by the hand of Love may each behold Upon my face the story of my woes. But thou, so that thy
pride no curb may know, And I, unhappy one, eternally might rest, Thou dost torment, by hiding
from my view Those lovely lights beneath the beauteous lids. Therefore the troubled sky's no more
serene, Nor hostile baleful shadows fall away. By thine own beauty, by this love of mine (So
great that e'en with this it may compare), Render thyself, oh Goddess,
unto pity!

Prolong no more this all-unmeasured woe, Ill-timed reward for such a love as this. Let not such
rigour with such splendour mate If it import thee that I live! Open, oh lady, the portals of
thine eyes, And look on me if thou wouldst give me death!

Here, the face upon which the story of his woes appears is the soul; in so far as it is open to receive
those superior gifts, for the which it has a potential aptitude, without the fulness of perfection
and act which waits for the dew of heaven. Thus was it well said: Anima mea sicut terra sine
aqua tibi; and again: Os meum operui; and again: Spiritum, quia mandata tua desiderabam. Then
"pride which knows no curb" is said in metaphor and similitude, as God is sometimes said to be
jealous, angry, or that He sleeps, and that signifies the difficulty with which He grants so
much even as to show his shoulders, which is the making himself known by means of posterior
things and effects. So the lights are covered with the eyelids, the troubled sky of the human
mind does not clear itself by the removal of the metaphors and enigmas. Besides which, because
he does not believe that all which is not, could not be, he prays the divine light, that by its
beauty, which ought not to be entirely concealed, at least according to the capacity of whoever
beholds it, and by his love, which, perchance, is equal to so much beauty (equal, he means,
of the beauty, in so far as he can comprehend it) that it surrender itself to pity, that is, that
it should do as those who are compassionate, and who from being capricious and gloomy become
gracious and affable and that it prolong not the evil which results from that privation, and
not allow that its splendour, for which it is so much desired, should appear greater than that
love by means of which it communicates itself, seeing that in it all the perfections are not
only equal but are also the same. In fine, he begs that it will no further sadden by privation,
for it can kill with the glance of its eyes and can also with those same give him life.

CES. Does he mean that death of lovers, which comes from intense joy, called by the Kabalists,
mors osculi, which same is eternal life, which a man may anticipate in this life and enjoy in eternity?

MAR.
He does.

VIII.

MAR. It is time to proceed to the consideration of the following design, similar to those previously
brought forward, and with which it has a certain affinity. There is an eagle, which with two
wings cleaves the sky; but I do not know how much and in what manner it comes to be retarded
by the weight of a stone which is tied to its leg. There is the legend: Scinditur incertum. It
is certain that it signifies the multitude, number and character
(volgo) of the powers of the soul, to exemplify which, that verse
is taken: Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus.

The whole of which character (volgo) in general is divided into two factions; although subordinate
to these, others are not wanting, of which some appeal to the high intelligence and splendour
of rectitude, while others incite and force in a certain manner to the low, to the uncleanness
of voluptuousness and compliance with natural desires. Therefore says the sonnet:

48.

I would do well--to me 'tis not allowed. With me my sun is not, although I be with him, For
being with him, I'm no more with myself: The farther from myself--the nearer unto him; The
nearer unto him, the farther from myself. Once to enjoy, doth cost me many tears, And seeking
happiness, I meet with woe. For that I look aloft, so blind am I. That I may gain my love, I
lose myself. Through bitter joy, and through sweet pain, Weighted with lead, I rise towards
the sky. Necessity withholds, goodness conducts me on, Fate sinks me down, and counsel raises
me, Desire spurs me, fear keeps me in check. Care kindles and the peril backward draws. Tell
me, what power or what subterfuge Can give me peace and bring me from this strife, If one repels,
the other draws me on.

The ascension goes on in the soul through the power and appulsion in the wings, which are the
intellect, or intellectual will upon which she naturally depends and through which she fixes her gaze
toward God, as to the highest good, and primal truth, as to absolute goodness and beauty.
Thus everything has an impetus towards its beginning retrogressively, and progressively towards
its end and perfection, as Empedocles well said, and from which sentence I think may be inferred
that which the Nolan said in this octave:

The sun must turn and reach his starting-point, Each wandering light must go towards its source,
That which is earth to earth itself reverts, The rivers from the sea to sea return, And thither,
whence desires have life and grow Must they aspire as to revered divinity, So every thought
born of my lady fair Comes back perforce to her, my goddess dear.

The intellectual power is never at rest, it is never satisfied with any comprehended truth,
but ever proceeds on and on towards that truth which is not comprehended. So also the will
which follows the apprehension, we see that it is never satisfied with anything finite. In consequence
of this, the essence of the soul is always referred to the source of its substance and entity.
Then as to the natural powers, by means of which it is turned to the protection and government
of matter, to which it allies itself, and by appulsion benefits and communicates of its perfection
to inferior things, through the likeness which it has to the Divine, which in its benignity
communicates itself or produces infinitely, i.e. imparts existence to the universal infinite and
to the innumerable worlds in it, or, finitely, produces this universe alone, subject to our
eyes and our common reason. Thus then in the one sole essence of the soul are found these
two kinds of powers, and as they are used for one's own good and for the good of others, it follows
that they are depicted with a pair of wings, by means of which it is potent towards the object
of the primal and immaterial potencies, and with a heavy stone, through which it is active and efficacious
towards the objects of the secondary and material potencies.

Whence it follows that the entire affection of the enthusiast is bifold, divided, harassed,
and placed in a position to incline itself more easily downwards than to force itself upwards:
seeing that the soul finds itself in a low and hostile country, and
reaches the far-off region of its more natural home where its powers
are the weakest.

CES. Do you think that this difficulty can be overcome?

MAR. Perfectly well; but the beginning is most difficult, and according as we make more and more
fruitful progress in contemplation we arrive at a greater and greater facility. As happens
to whoever flys up high, the more he rises above the earth the more air he has beneath to
uphold him, and consequently the less he is affected by gravitation; he may even rise so high
that he cannot, without the labour of cleaving the air, return downwards, although one might imagine
it were more easy to cleave the air downwards towards the earth than to rise on high towards the
stars.

CES. So that with progress of this kind a greater and greater facility is acquired for mounting on
high?

MAR. So it is; therefore well said Tansillo:--

"The more I feel the air beneath my feet So much the more towards the wind I bend My swiftest
pinions And spurn the world and up towards Heaven I go."

As every part of bodies and of their elements, the nearer they come to their natural place, the
greater the impetus and force with which they move, until at last, whether they will or not, they
must prevail. That which we see then in the parts of bodies and in the bodies themselves we ought
also to allow of intellectual things towards their proper objects, as their proper places, countries,
and ends. Whence you may easily comprehend the entire significance of the figure, the legend,
and the verses.

CES. So much so that whatsoever you might add thereto would appear to me superfluous.

IX.

CES. Let us see what is here represented by those two radiating arrows upon a target around
which is written: Vicit instans.

MAR. The continual struggle in the soul of the enthusiast, the which,
in consequence of the long familiarity which it had with matter was
hard and incapable of being penetrated by the rays of the splendour
of the Divine intelligence and the species of the Divine goodness;
during which time, he says that the heart was enamelled with diamond,
that is, the affection was hard and not capable of being heated and
penetrated, and it rejected the blows of love which assailed it on
innumerable sides.

That is, it did not feel itself wounded by those wounds of eternal life of which the Psalmist
speaks when he says: Vulnerasti cor meum, o dilecta, vulnerasti cor meum. The which wounds are
not from iron or other material through the vigour and strength of nerves, but are darts of
Diana, or of Phoebus, that is, either from the goddess of the deserts--of
contemplation of truth, that is, from Diana, who is the order of the
second intelligences, which transfer the splendour received from the
first and communicate it to the others, who are deprived of a more
open vision; or else from the principal god Apollo, who with his own,
and not a borrowed splendour, sends his darts, that is, his rays,
so many and from such innumerable points, which are all the species
of things, which are indications of Divine goodness, intelligence,
beauty, and wisdom, according to the various degrees, from the simple
comprehension, to the becoming heroic enthusiasts; because the adamantine
subject does not reflect from its surface the impression of the light,
but, destroyed and overcome by the heat and light, it becomes in substance
luminous--all light--so that it is penetrated within the affection
and conception.

This is not immediately, at the beginning of generation, when the soul comes forth fresh from
the intoxication of Lethe, and drenched with the waves of forgetfulness
and confusion, so that the spirit comes into captivity to the body,
and is put into the condition of growth; but little by little, it
goes on digesting, so as to become fitted for the action of the sensitive
faculty, until, through the rational and discursive faculty, it comes
to a purer intellectual one, so that it can present itself to the
mind, without feeling itself befogged by the exhalations of that humour,
which, through the exercise of contemplation, has been saved from
putrefaction in the stomach and is duly digested.

In this state, the present enthusiast shows himself to have remained thirty years, during which
time he had not reached that purity of conception which would make him a suitable habitation
for the wandering species, which offering themselves to all, equally, knock, ever at the door
of the intelligence.

At last, Love, who in various ways and at different times had assaulted him as it were in vain--as
the light and heat of the sun are said to be useless to those who
are in the opaque depths and bowels of the earth--having located itself
in those sacred lights, that is having shown forth the Divine Beauty
through two intelligible species the which bound his intellect through
the reasoning of Truth and warmed his affections through the reasoning
of Goodness; while the material and sensitive desires became superseded,
which aforetime used, as it were, to triumph, remaining intact, notwithstanding
the excellence of the soul.

Because those lights which made present the illuminating, acting
intellect and sun of intelligence found easy ingress through his eyes;
that of Truth (the intellect of Truth?) through the door of the intellectual
faculty; that of Goodness (intellect of Goodness?) through the door
of the appetitive faculty, to the heart, that is, the substance of
the general affection.

This was that double ray, which came as from the hand of an irate warrior, who showed himself,
now, as ready and as bold, as aforetime he had appeared weak and negligent.[I]

Then, when he first felt warmed and illuminated in his conception, was that victorious point and
moment of which it is said: Vicit instans.

[I] He takes it by assault, without offering battle: the heart is unable to resist him.--("Spiritual
Torrents.")

Thus you can understand the sense of the following figure, legend and sonnet, which says:--

49.

I fought with all my strength, 'gainst Love Divine When he assailed
with blows from every side This cold, enamelled, adamantine heart,
Whence my desires defeated his intent.

At last, one day, 'twas as the heavens had willed. Encamped I found him in those holy lights Which,
through mine own alone, of all the rest An easy entrance to my heart could find. 'Twas then upon
me fell that double bolt, Flung as from hand of irate warrior Who had for thirty years besieged
in vain. He marked that place and strongly there he held, Planted the trophy there, and evermore
He holds my fleet wings in restrainment.

Meanwhile since then with more solemnity of preparation The anger and the ire of my sweet
enemy Cease not to wound my heart.

Rare moment was that; the end of the beginning and perfection of victory; rare were those two
species which amongst all others found easy entrance, seeing that they contain in themselves the
efficacy and the virtue of all the others; for what higher and more excellent form can present
itself than that of the beauty, goodness and truth, which are the source of every other truth,
beauty, and goodness? "He marked that place"--that is, took possession of the affections, noted them,
and impressed upon them his own character; "and strongly there he
held;" he confirmed and established them and sanctified them so that
he can never again lose them; for it is not possible that one should
turn to love any other thing when once he has conceived in his mind
the Divine Beauty, and it is as impossible that he can do other than
love it, as it is impossible that his desires should fall otherwise
than towards good, or species of good.

Therefore his inclination is in the highest degree towards the primal
good. Then turning red, he said, with violent
passion,--

"Get away, you lumbering idiot! Don't come bellowing at me; you're not fit to speak to anything
but a cart-horse!"

It was not the first time Philip had been made angry by him, but Tom had never before been
assailed with verbal missiles that he understood so well.

"I'm fit to speak to something better than you, you poor-spirited imp!" said Tom, lighting
up immediately at Philip's fire. "You know I won't hit you, because you're no better than a
girl. But I'm an honest man's son, and your father's a rogue; everybody says so!"

Tom flung out of the room, and slammed the door after him, made strangely heedless by his anger;
for to slam doors within the hearing of Mrs. Stelling, who was probably not far off, was an
offence only to be wiped out by twenty lines of Virgil. In fact, that lady did presently descend
from her room, in double wonder at the noise and the subsequent cessation of Philip's music.
She found him sitting in a heap on the hassock, and crying bitterly.

"What's the matter, Wakem? what was that noise about? Who slammed the door?"

Philip looked up, and hastily dried his eyes. "It was Tulliver who came in--to ask me to go
out with him."

"And what are you in trouble about?" said Mrs. Stelling.

Philip was not her favorite of the two pupils; he was less obliging than Tom, who was made
useful in many ways. Still, his father paid more than Mr. Tulliver did, and she meant him to
feel that she behaved exceedingly well to him. Philip, however, met her advances toward a good
understanding very much as a caressed mollusk meets an invitation to show himself out of his
shell. Mrs. Stelling was not a loving, tender-hearted woman; she was a woman whose skirt sat
well, who adjusted her waist and patted her curls with a preoccupied air when she inquired
after your welfare. These things, doubtless, represent a great social power, but it is not
the power of love; and no other power could win Philip from his personal reserve.

He said, in answer to her question, "My toothache came on, and made me hysterical again."

This had been the fact once, and Philip was glad of the recollection; it was like an inspiration
to enable him to excuse his crying. He had to accept eau-de-Cologne and to refuse creosote
in consequence; but that was easy.

Meanwhile Tom, who had for the first time sent a poisoned arrow into Philip's heart, had returned
to the carriage-house, where he found Mr. Poulter, with a fixed and earnest eye, wasting the
perfections of his sword-exercise on probably observant but inappreciative rats. But Mr. Poulter
was a host in himself; that is to say, he admired himself more than a whole army of spectators
could have admired him. He took no notice of Tom's return, being too entirely absorbed in the
cut and thrust,--the solemn one, two, three, four; and Tom, not without a slight feeling of
alarm at Mr. Poulter's fixed eye and hungry-looking sword, which seemed impatient for something
else to cut besides the air, admired the performance from as great a distance as possible.
It was not until Mr. Poulter paused and wiped the perspiration from his forehead, that Tom
felt the full charm of the sword-exercise, and wished it to be repeated.

"Mr. Poulter," said Tom, when the sword was being finally sheathed, "I wish you'd lend me your
sword a little while to keep."

"No no, young gentleman," said Mr. Poulter, shaking his head decidedly; "you might do yourself
some mischief with it."

"No, I'm sure I wouldn't; I'm sure I'd take care and not hurt myself. I shouldn't take it out
of the sheath much, but I could ground arms with it, and all that."

"No, no, it won't do, I tell you; it won't do," said Mr. Poulter, preparing to depart. "What
'ud Mr. Stelling say to me?"

"Oh, I say, do, Mr. Poulter! I'd give you my five-shilling piece if you'd let me keep the sword
a week. Look here!" said Tom, reaching out the attractively large round of silver. The young
dog calculated the effect as well as if he had been a philosopher.

"Well," said Mr. Poulter, with still deeper gravity, "you must keep it out of sight, you know."

"Oh yes, I'll keep it under the bed," said Tom, eagerly, "or else at the bottom of my large box."

"And let me see, now, whether you can draw it out of the sheath without hurting yourself."
That process having been gone through more than once, Mr. Poulter felt that he had acted with
scrupulous conscientiousness, and said, "Well, now, Master Tulliver, if I take the crown-piece,
it is to make sure as you'll do no mischief with the sword."

"Oh no, indeed, Mr. Poulter," said Tom, delightedly handing him the crown-piece, and grasping
the sword, which, he thought, might have been lighter with advantage.

"But if Mr. Stelling catches you carrying it in?" said Mr. Poulter, pocketing the crown-piece
provisionally while he raised this new doubt.

"Oh, he always keeps in his upstairs study on Saturday afternoon," said Tom, who disliked anything
sneaking, but was not disinclined to a little stratagem in a worthy cause. So he carried off
the sword in triumph mixed with dread--dread that he might encounter Mr. or Mrs. Stelling--to
his bedroom, where, after some consideration, he hid it in the closet behind some hanging clothes.
That night he fell asleep in the thought that he would astonish Maggie with it when she came,--tie
it round his waist with his red comforter, and make her believe that the sword was his own,
and that he was going to be a soldier. There was nobody but Maggie who would be silly enough
to believe him, or whom he dared allow to know he had a sword; and Maggie was really coming
next week to see Tom, before she went to a boarding-school with Lucy.

If you think a lad of thirteen would have been so childish, you must be an exceptionally wise
man, who, although you are devoted to a civil calling, requiring you to look bland rather than
formidable, yet never, since you had a beard, threw yourself into a martial attitude, and frowned
before the looking-glass. It is doubtful whether our soldiers would be maintained if there
were not pacific people at home who like to fancy themselves soldiers. War, like other dramatic
spectacles, might possibly cease for want of a "public."

Chapter V

Maggie's Second Visit

This last breach between the two lads was not readily mended, and for some time they spoke
to each other no more than was necessary. Their natural antipathy of temperament made resentment
an easy passage to hatred, and in Philip the transition seemed to have begun; there was no
malignity in his disposition, but there was a susceptibility that made him peculiarly liable
to a strong sense of repulsion. The ox--we may venture to assert it on the authority of a great
classic--is not given to use his teeth as an instrument of attack, and Tom was an excellent
bovine lad, who ran at questionable objects in a truly ingenious bovine manner; but he had
blundered on Philip's tenderest point, and had caused him as much acute pain as if he had studied
the means with the nicest precision and the most envenomed spite. Tom saw no reason why they
should not make up this quarrel as they had done many others, by behaving as if nothing had
happened; for though he had never before said to Philip that his father was a rogue, this idea
had so habitually made part of his feeling as to the relation between himself and his dubious
schoolfellow, who he could neither like nor dislike, that the mere utterance did not make such
an epoch to him as it did to Philip. And he had a right to say so when Philip hectored over
him, and called him names. But perceiving that his first advances toward amity were not met,
he relapsed into his least favorable disposition toward Philip, and resolved never to appeal
to him either about drawing or exercise again. They were only so far civil to each other as
was necessary to prevent their state of feud from being observed by Mr. Stelling, who would
have "put down" such nonsense with great vigor.

When Maggie came, however, she could not help looking with growing interest at the new schoolfellow,
although he was the son of that wicked Lawyer Wakem, who made her father so angry. She had
arrived in the middle of school-hours, and had sat by while Philip went through his lessons
with Mr. Stelling. Tom, some weeks ago, had sent her word that Philip knew no end of stories,--not
stupid stories like hers; and she was convinced now from her own observation that he must be
very clever; she hoped he would think her rather clever too, when she came to talk to him.
Maggie, moreover, had rather a tenderness for deformed things; she preferred the wry-necked
lambs, because it seemed to her that the lambs which were quite strong and well made wouldn't
mind so much about being petted; and she was especially fond of petting objects that would
think it very delightful to be petted by her. She loved Tom very dearly, but she often wished
that he cared more about her loving him.

"I think Philip Wakem seems a nice boy, Tom," she said, when they went out of the study together
into the garden, to pass the interval before dinner. "He couldn't choose his father, you know;
and I've read of very bad men who had good sons, as well as good parents who had bad children.
And if Philip is good, I think we ought to be the more sorry for him because his father is
not a good man. You like him, don't you?"

"Oh, he's a queer fellow," said Tom, curtly, "and he's as sulky as can be with me, because
I told him his father was a rogue. And I'd a right to tell him so, for it was true; and he
began it, with calling me names. But you stop here by yourself a bit, Maggie, will you? I've
got something I want to do upstairs."

"Can't I go too?" said Maggie, who in this first day of meeting again loved Tom's shadow.

"No, it's something I'll tell you about by-and-by, not yet," said Tom, skipping away.

In the afternoon the boys were at their books in the study, preparing the morrow's lesson's
that they might have a holiday in the evening in honor of Maggie's arrival. Tom was hanging
over his Latin grammar, moving his lips inaudibly like a strict but impatient Catholic repeating
his tale of paternosters; and Philip, at the other end of the room, was busy with two volumes,
with a look of contented diligence that excited Maggie's curiosity; he did not look at all
as if he were learning a lesson. She sat on a low stool at nearly a right angle with the two
boys, watching first one and then the other; and Philip, looking off his book once toward the
fire-place, caught the pair of questioning dark eyes fixed upon him. He thought this sister
of Tulliver's seemed a nice little thing, quite unlike her brother; he wished he had a little
sister. What was it, he wondered, that made Maggie's dark eyes remind him of the stories about
princesses being turned into animals? I think it was that her eyes were full of unsatisfied
intelligence, and unsatisfied beseeching affection.

"I say, Magsie," said Tom at last, shutting his books and putting them away with the energy
and decision of a perfect master in the art of leaving off, "I've done my lessons now. Come
upstairs with me."

"What is it?" said Maggie, when they were outside the door, a slight suspicion crossing her
mind as she remembered Tom's preliminary visit upstairs. "It isn't a trick you're going to
play me, now?"

"No, no, Maggie," said Tom, in his most coaxing tone; "It's something you'll like ever so."

He put his arm round her neck, and she put hers round his waist, and twined together in this
way, they went upstairs.

"I say, Magsie, you must not tell anybody, you know," said Tom, "else I shall get fifty lines."

"Is it alive?" said Maggie, whose imagination had settled for the moment on the idea that Tom
kept a ferret clandestinely.

"Oh, I sha'n't tell you," said he. "Now you go into that corner and hide your face, while I
reach it out," he added, as he locked the bedroom door behind them. I'll tell you when to turn
round. You mustn't squeal out, you know."

"Oh, but if you frighten me, I shall," said Maggie, beginning to look rather serious.

"You won't be frightened, you silly thing," said Tom. "Go and hide your face, and mind you
don't peep."

"Of course I sha'n't peep," said Maggie, disdainfully; and she buried her face in the pillow
like a person of strict honor.

But Tom looked round warily as he walked to the closet; then he stepped into the narrow space,
and almost closed the door. Maggie kept her face buried without the aid of principle, for in
that dream-suggestive attitude she had soon forgotten where she was, and her thoughts were
busy with the poor deformed boy, who was so clever, when Tom called out, "Now then, Magsie!"

Nothing but long meditation and preconcerted arrangement of effects would have enabled Tom
to present so striking a figure as he did to Maggie when she looked up. Dissatisfied with the
pacific aspect of a face which had no more than the faintest hint of flaxen eyebrow, together
with a pair of amiable blue-gray eyes and round pink cheeks that refused to look formidable,
let him frown as he would before the looking-glass (Philip had once told him of a man who had
a horseshoe frown, and Tom had tried with all his frowning might to make a horseshoe on his
forehead), he had had recourse to that unfailing source of the terrible, burnt cork, and had
made himself a pair of black eyebrows that met in a satisfactory manner over his nose, and
were matched by a less carefully adjusted blackness about the chin. He had wound a red handkerchief
round his cloth cap to give it the air of a turban, and his red comforter across his breast
as a scarf,--an amount of red which, with the tremendous frown on his brow, and the decision
with which he grasped the sword, as he held it with its point resting on the ground, would
suffice to convey an approximate idea of his fierce and bloodthirsty disposition.

Maggie looked bewildered for a moment, and Tom enjoyed that moment keenly; but in the next
she laughed, clapped her hands together, and said, "Oh, Tom, you've made yourself like Bluebeard
at the show."

It was clear she had not been struck with the presence of the sword,--it was not unsheathed.
Her frivolous mind required a more direct appeal to its sense of the terrible, and Tom prepared
for his master-stroke. Frowning with a double amount of intention, if not of corrugation, he
(carefully) drew the sword from its sheath, and pointed it at Maggie.

"Oh, Tom, please don't!" exclaimed Maggie, in a tone of suppressed dread, shrinking away from
him into the opposite corner. "I shall scream--I'm sure I shall! Oh, don't I wish I'd never
come upstairs!"

The corners of Tom's mouth showed an inclination to a smile of complacency that was immediately
checked as inconsistent with the severity of a great warrior. Slowly he let down the scabbard
on the floor, lest it should make too much noise, and then said sternly,--

"I'm the Duke of Wellington! March!" stamping forward with the right leg a little bent, and
the sword still pointing toward Maggie, who, trembling, and with tear-filled eyes, got upon
the bed, as the only means of widening the space between them.

Tom, happy in this spectator of his military performances, even though the spectator was only
Maggie, proceeded, with the utmost exertion of his force, to such an exhibition of the cut
and thrust as would necessarily be expected of the Duke of Wellington.

"Tom, I will not bear it, I will scream," said Maggie, at the first movement of the sword.
"You'll hurt yourself; you'll cut your head off!"

"One--two," said Tom, resolutely, though at "two" his wrist trembled a little. "Three" came
more slowly, and with it the sword swung downward, and Maggie gave a loud shriek. The sword
had fallen, with its edge on Tom's foot, and in a moment after he had fallen too. Maggie leaped
from the bed, still shrieking, and immediately there was a rush of footsteps toward the room.
Mr. Stelling, from his upstairs study, was the first to enter. He found both the children on
the floor. Tom had fainted, and Maggie was shaking him by the collar of his jacket, screaming,
with wild eyes. She thought he was dead, poor child! and yet she shook him, as if that would
bring him back to life. In another minute she was sobbing with joy because Tom opened his eyes.
She couldn't sorrow yet that he had hurt his foot; it seemed as if all happiness lay in his
being alive.

Chapter VI

A Love-Scene

Poor Tom bore his severe pain heroically, and was resolute in not "telling" of Mr. Poulter
more than was unavoidable; the five-shilling piece remained a secret even to Maggie. But there
was a terrible dread weighing on his mind, so terrible that he dared not even ask the question
which might bring the fatal "yes"; he dared not ask the surgeon or Mr. Stelling, "Shall I be
lame, Sir?" He mastered himself so as not to cry out at the pain; but when his foot had been
dressed, and he was left alone with Maggie seated by his bedside, the children sobbed together,
with their heads laid on the same pillow. Tom was thinking of himself walking about on crutches,
like the wheelwright's son; and Maggie, who did not guess what was in his mind, sobbed for
company. It had not occurred to the surgeon or to Mr. Stelling to anticipate this dread in
Tom's mind, and to reassure him by hopeful words. But Philip watched the surgeon out of the
house, and waylaid Mr. Stelling to ask the very question that Tom had not dared to ask for himself.

"I beg your pardon, sir,--but does Mr. Askern say Tulliver will be lame?"

"Oh, no; oh, no," said Mr. Stelling, "not permanently; only for a little while."

"Did he tell Tulliver so, sir, do you think?"

"No; nothing was said to him on the subject."

"Then may I go and tell him, sir?"

"Yes, to be sure; now you mention it, I dare say he may be troubling about that. Go to his
bedroom, but be very quiet at present."

It had been Philip's first thought when he heard of the accident,--"Will Tulliver be lame?
It will be very hard for him if he is"; and Tom's hitherto unforgiven offences were washed
out by that pity. Philip felt that they were no longer in a state of repulsion, but were being
drawn into a common current of suffering and sad privation. His imagination did not dwell on
the outward calamity and its future effect on Tom's life, but it made vividly present to him
the probable state of Tom's feeling. Philip had only lived fourteen years, but those years
had, most of them, been steeped in the sense of a lot irremediably hard.

"Mr. Askern says you'll soon be all right again, Tulliver, did you know?" he said rather timidly,
as he stepped gently up to Tom's bed. "I've just been to ask Mr. Stelling, and he says you'll
walk as well as ever again by-and-day."

Tom looked up with that momentary stopping of the breath which comes with a sudden joy; then
he gave a long sigh, and turned his blue-gray eyes straight on Philip's face, as he had not
done for a fortnight or more. As for Maggie, this intimation of a possibility she had not thought
of before affected her as a new trouble; the bare idea of Tom's being always lame overpowered
the assurance that such a misfortune was not likely to befall him, and she clung to him and
cried afresh.

"Don't be a little silly, Magsie," said Tom, tenderly, feeling very brave now. "I shall soon
get well."

"Good-by, Tulliver," said Philip, putting out his small, delicate hand, which Tom clasped immediately
with his more substantial fingers.

"I say," said Tom, "ask Mr. Stelling to let you come and sit with me sometimes, till I get
up again, Wakem; and tell me about Robert Bruce, you know."

After that, Philip spent all his time out of school-hours with Tom and Maggie. Tom liked to
hear fighting stories as much as ever, but he insisted strongly on the fact that those great
fighters who did so many wonderful things and came off unhurt, wore excellent armor from head
to foot, which made fighting easy work, he considered. He should not have hurt his foot if
he had had an iron shoe on. He listened with great interest to a new story of Philip's about
a man who had a very bad wound in his foot, and cried out so dreadfully with the pain that
his friends could bear with him no longer, but put him ashore on a desert island, with nothing
but some wonderful poisoned arrows to kill animals with for food.

"I didn't roar out a bit, you know," Tom said, "and I dare say my foot was as bad as his. It's
cowardly to roar."

But Maggie would have it that when anything hurt you very much, it was quite permissible to
cry out, and it was cruel of people not to bear it. She wanted to know if Philoctetes had a
sister, and why she didn't go with him on the desert island and take care of him.

One day, soon after Philip had told this story, he and Maggie were in the study alone together
while Tom's foot was being dressed. Philip was at his books, and Maggie, after sauntering idly
round the room, not caring to do anything in particular, because she would soon go to Tom again,
went and leaned on the table near Philip to see what he was doing, for they were quite old
friends now, and perfectly at home with each other.

"What are you reading about in Greek?" she said. "It's poetry, I can see that, because the
lines are so short."

"It's about Philoctetes, the lame man I was telling you of yesterday," he answered, resting
his head on his hand, and looking at her as if he were not at all sorry to be interrupted.
Maggie, in her absent way, continued to lean forward, resting on her arms and moving her feet
about, while her dark eyes got more and more fixed and vacant, as if she had quite forgotten
Philip and his book.

"Maggie," said Philip, after a minute or two, still leaning on his elbow and looking at her,
"if you had had a brother like me, do you think you should have loved him as well as Tom?"

Maggie started a little on being roused from her reverie, and said, "What?" Philip repeated
his question.

"Oh, yes, better," she answered immediately. "No, not better; because I don't think I could
love you better than Tom. But I should be so sorry,--so sorry for you."

Philip colored; he had meant to imply, would she love him as well in spite of his deformity,
and yet when she alluded to it so plainly, he winced under her pity. Maggie, young as she was,
felt her mistake. Hitherto she had instinctively behaved as if she were quite unconscious of
Philip's deformity; her own keen sensitiveness and experience under family criticism sufficed
to teach her this as well as if she had been directed by the most finished breeding.

"But you are so very clever, Philip, and you can play and sing," she added quickly. "I wish
you were my brother. I'm very fond of you. And you would stay at home with me when Tom went
out, and you would teach me everything; wouldn't you,--Greek and everything?"

"But you'll go away soon, and go to school, Maggie," said Philip, "and then you'll forget all
about me, and not care for me any more. And then I shall see you when you're grown up, and
you'll hardly take any notice of me."

"Oh, no, I sha'n't forget you, I'm sure," said Maggie, shaking her head very seriously. "I
never forget anything, and I think about everybody when I'm away from them. I think about poor
Yap; he's got a lump in his throat, and Luke says he'll die. Only don't you tell Tom. because
it will vex him so. You never saw Yap; he's a queer little dog,--nobody cares about him but
Tom and me."

"Do you care as much about me as you do about Yap, Maggie?" said Philip, smiling rather sadly.

"Oh, yes, I should think so," said Maggie, laughing.

"I'm very fond of you, Maggie; I shall never forget you," said Philip, "and when I'm very unhappy,
I shall always think of you, and wish I had a sister with dark eyes, just like yours."

"Why do you like my eyes?" said Maggie, well pleased. She had never heard any one but her father
speak of her eyes as if they had merit.

"I don't know," said Philip. "They're not like any other eyes. They seem trying to speak,--trying
to speak kindly. I don't like other people to look at me much, but I like you to look at me,
Maggie."

"Why, I think you're fonder of me than Tom is," said Maggie, rather sorrowfully. Then, wondering
how she could convince Philip that she could like him just as well, although he was crooked,
she said:

"Should you like me to kiss you, as I do Tom? I will, if you like."

"Yes, very much; nobody kisses me."

Maggie put her arm round his neck and kissed him quite earnestly.

"There now," she said, "I shall always remember you, and kiss you when I see you again, if
it's ever so long. But I'll go now, because I think Mr. Askern's done with Tom's foot."

When their father came the second time, Maggie said to him, "Oh, father, Philip Wakem is so
very good to Tom; he is such a clever boy, and I do love him. And you love him too, Tom, don't
you? Say you love him," she added entreatingly.

Tom colored a little as he looked at his father, and said: "I sha'n't be friends with him when
I leave school, father; but we've made it up now, since my foot has been bad, and he's taught
me to play at draughts, and I can beat him."

"Well, well," said Mr. Tulliver, "if he's good to you, try and make him amends, and be good
to him. He's a poor crooked creature, and takes after his dead mother. But don't you be getting
too thick with him; he's got his father's blood in him too. Ay, ay, the gray colt may chance
to kick like his black sire."

The jarring natures of the two boys effected what Mr. Tulliver's admonition alone might have
failed to effect; in spite of Philip's new kindness, and Tom's answering regard in this time
of his trouble, they never became close friends. When Maggie was gone, and when Tom by-and-by
began to walk about as usual, the friendly warmth that had been kindled by pity and gratitude
died out by degrees, and left them in their old relation to each other. Philip was often peevish
and contemptuous; and Tom's more specific and kindly impressions gradually melted into the
old background of suspicion and dislike toward him as a queer fellow, a humpback, and the son
of a rogue. If boys and men are to be welded together in the glow of transient feeling, they
must be made of metal that will mix, else they inevitably fall asunder when the heat dies out.

Chapter VII

The Golden Gates Are Passed

So Tom went on even to the fifth half-year--till he was turned sixteen--at King's Lorton, while
Maggie was growing with a rapidity which her aunts considered highly reprehensible, at Miss
Firniss's boarding-school in the ancient town of Laceham on the Floss, with cousin Lucy for
her companion. In her early letters to Tom she had always sent her love to Philip, and asked
many questions about him, which were answered by brief sentences about Tom's toothache, and
a turf-house which he was helping to build in the garden, with other items of that kind. She
was pained to hear Tom say in the holidays that Philip was as queer as ever again, and often
cross. They were no longer very good friends, she perceived; and when she reminded Tom that
he ought always to love Philip for being so good to him when his foot was bad, he answered:
"Well, it isn't my fault; I don't do anything to him." She hardly ever saw Philip during the
remainder of their school-life; in the Midsummer holidays he was always away at the seaside,
and at Christmas she could only meet him at long intervals in the street of St. Ogg's. When
they did meet, she remembered her promise to kiss him, but, as a young lady who had been at
a boarding-school, she knew now that such a greeting was out of the question, and Philip would
not expect it. The promise was void, like so many other sweet, illusory promises of our childhood;
void as promises made in Eden before the seasons were divided, and when the starry blossoms
grew side by side with the ripening peach,--impossible to be fulfilled when the golden gates
had been passed.

But when their father was actually engaged in the long-threatened lawsuit, and Wakem, as the
agent at once of Pivart and Old Harry, was acting against him, even Maggie felt, with some
sadness, that they were not likely ever to have any intimacy with Philip again; the very name
of Wakem made her father angry, and she had once heard him say that if that crook-backed son
lived to inherit his father's ill-gotten gains, there would be a curse upon him. "Have as little
to do with him at school as you can, my lad," he said to Tom; and the command was obeyed the
more easily because Mr. Sterling by this time had two additional pupils; for though this gentleman's
rise in the world was not of that meteor-like rapidity which the admirers of his extemporaneous
eloquence had expected for a preacher whose voice demanded so wide a sphere, he had yet enough
of growing prosperity to enable him to increase his expenditure in continued disproportion
to his income.

As for Tom's school course, it went on with mill-like monotony, his mind continuing to move
with a slow, half-stifled pulse in a medium uninteresting or unintelligible ideas. But each
vacation he brought home larger and larger drawings with the satiny rendering of landscape,
and water-colors in vivid greens, together with manuscript books full of exercises and problems,
in which the handwriting was all the finer because he gave his whole mind to it. Each vacation
he brought home a new book or two, indicating his progress through different stages of history,
Christian doctrine, and Latin literature; and that passage was not entirely without results,
besides the possession of the books. Tom's ear and tongue had become accustomed to a great
many words and phrases which are understood to be signs of an educated condition; and though
he had never really applied his mind to any one of his lessons, the lessons had left a deposit
of vague, fragmentary, ineffectual notions. Mr. Tulliver, seeing signs of acquirement beyond
the reach of his own criticism, thought it was probably all right with Tom's education; he
observed, indeed, that there were no maps, and not enough "summing"; but he made no formal
complaint to Mr. Stelling. It was a puzzling business, this schooling; and if he took Tom away,
where could he send him with better effect?

By the time Tom had reached his last quarter at King's Lorton, the years had made striking
changes in him since the day we saw him returning from Mr. Jacobs's academy. He was a tall
youth now, carrying himself without the least awkwardness, and speaking without more shyness
than was a becoming symptom of blended diffidence and pride; he wore his tail-coat and his
stand-up collars, and watched the down on his lip with eager impatience, looking every day
at his virgin razor, with which he had provided himself in the last holidays. Philip had already
left,--at the autumn quarter,--that he might go to the south for the winter, for the sake of
his health; and this change helped to give Tom the unsettled, exultant feeling that usually
belongs to the last months before leaving school. This quarter, too, there was some hope of
his father's lawsuit being decided; that made the prospect of home more entirely pleasurable.
For Tom, who had gathered his view of the case from his father's conversation, had no doubt
that Pivart would be beaten.

Tom had not heard anything from home for some weeks,--a fact which did not surprise him, for
his father and mother were not apt to manifest their affection in unnecessary letters,--when,
to his great surprise, on the morning of a dark, cold day near the end of November, he was
told, soon after entering the study at nine o'clock, that his sister was in the drawing-room.
It was Mrs. Stelling who had come into the study to tell him, and she left him to enter the
drawing-room alone.

Maggie, too, was tall now, with braided and coiled hair; she was almost as tall as Tom, though
she was only thirteen; and she really looked older than he did at that moment. She had thrown
off her bonnet, her heavy braids were pushed back from her forehead, as if it would not bear
that extra load, and her young face had a strangely worn look, as her eyes turned anxiously
toward the door. When Tom entered she did not speak, but only went up to him, put her arms
round his neck, and kissed him earnestly. He was used to various moods of hers, and felt no
alarm at the unusual seriousness of her greeting.

"Why, how is it you're come so early this cold morning, Maggie? Did you come in the gig?" said
Tom, as she backed toward the sofa, and drew him to her side.

"No, I came by the coach. I've walked from the turnpike."

"But how is it you're not at school? The holidays have not begun yet?"

"Father wanted me at home," said Maggie, with a slight trembling of the lip. "I came home three
or four days ago."

"Isn't my father well?" said Tom, rather anxiously.

"Not quite," said Maggie. "He's very unhappy, Tom. The lawsuit is ended, and I came to tell
you because I thought it would be better for you to know it before you came home, and I didn't
like only to send you a letter."

"My father hasn't lost?" said Tom, hastily, springing from the sofa, and standing before Maggie
with his hands suddenly thrust into his pockets.

"Yes, dear Tom," said Maggie, looking up at him with trembling.

Tom was silent a minute or two, with his eyes fixed on the floor. Then he said:

"My father will have to pay a good deal of money, then?"

"Yes," said Maggie, rather faintly.

"Well, it can't be helped," said Tom, bravely, not translating the loss of a large sum of money
into any tangible results. "But my father's very much vexed, I dare say?" he added, looking
at Maggie, and thinking that her agitated face was only part of her girlish way of taking things.

"Yes," said Maggie, again faintly. Then, urged to fuller speech by Tom's freedom from apprehension,
she said loudly and rapidly, as if the words would burst from her: "Oh, Tom, he will lose the
mill and the land and everything; he will have nothing left."

Tom's eyes flashed out one look of surprise at her, before he turned pale, and trembled visibly.
He said nothing, but sat down on the sofa again, looking vaguely out of the opposite window.

Anxiety about the future had never entered Tom's mind. His father had always ridden a good
horse, kept a good house, and had the cheerful, confident air of a man who has plenty of property
to fall back upon. Tom had never dreamed that his father would "fail"; that was a form of misfortune
which he had always heard spoken of as a deep disgrace, and disgrace was an idea that he could
not associate with any of his relations, least of all with his father. A proud sense of family
respectability was part of the very air Tom had been born and brought up in. He knew there
were people in St. Ogg's who made a show without money to support it, and he had always heard
such people spoken of by his own friends with contempt and reprobation. He had a strong belief,
which was a lifelong habit, and required no definite evidence to rest on, that his father could
spend a great deal of money if he chose; and since his education at Mr. Stelling's had given
him a more expensive view of life, he had often thought that when he got older he would make
a figure in the world, with his horse and dogs and saddle, and other accoutrements of a fine
young man, and show himself equal to any of his contemporaries at St. Ogg's, who might consider
themselves a grade above him in society because their fathers were professional men, or had
large oil-mills. As to the prognostics and headshaking of his aunts and uncles, they had never
produced the least effect on him, except to make him think that aunts and uncles were disagreeable
society; he had heard them find fault in much the same way as long as he could remember. His
father knew better than they did.

The down had come on Tom's lip, yet his thoughts and expectations had been hitherto only the
reproduction, in changed forms, of the boyish dreams in which he had lived three years ago.
He was awakened now with a violent shock.

Maggie was frightened at Tom's pale, trembling silence. There was something else to tell him,--something
worse. She threw her arms round him at last, and said, with a half sob:

"Oh, Tom--dear, dear Tom, don't fret too much; try and bear it well."

Tom turned his cheek passively to meet her entreating kisses, and there gathered a moisture
in his eyes, which he just rubbed away with his hand. The action seemed to rouse him, for he
shook himself and said: "I shall go home, with you, Maggie. Didn't my father say I was to go?"

"No, Tom, father didn't wish it," said Maggie, her anxiety about his feeling helping her to
master her agitation. What would he do when she told him all? "But mother wants you to come,--poor
mother!--she cries so. Oh, Tom, it's very dreadful at home."

Maggie's lips grew whiter, and she began to tremble almost as Tom had done. The two poor things
clung closer to each other, both trembling,--the one at an unshapen fear, the other at the
image of a terrible certainty. When Maggie spoke, it was hardly above a whisper.

"And--and--poor father----"

Maggie could not utter it. But the suspense was intolerable to Tom. A vague idea of going to
prison, as a consequence of debt, was the shape his fears had begun to take.

"Where's my father?" he said impatiently. "Tell me, Maggie."

"He's at home," said Maggie, finding it easier to reply to that question. "But," she added,
after a pause, "not himself--he fell off his horse. He has known nobody but me ever since--he
seems to have lost his senses. O father, father----"

With these last words, Maggie's sobs burst forth with the more violence for the previous struggle
against them. Tom felt that pressure of the heart which forbids tears; he had no distinct vision
of their troubles as Maggie had, who had been at home; he only felt the crushing weight of
what seemed unmitigated misfortune. He tightened his arm almost convulsively round Maggie as
she sobbed, but his face looked rigid and tearless, his eyes blank,--as if a black curtain
of cloud had suddenly fallen on his path.

But Maggie soon checked herself abruptly; a single thought had acted on her like a startling sound.

"We must set out, Tom, we must not stay. Father will miss me; we must be at the turnpike at
ten to meet the coach." She said this with hasty decision, rubbing her eyes, and rising to
seize her bonnet.

Tom at once felt the same impulse, and rose too. "Wait a minute, Maggie," he said. "I must
speak to Mr. Stelling, and then we'll go."

He thought he must go to the study where the pupils were; but on his way he met Mr. Stelling,
who had heard from his wife that Maggie appeared to be in trouble when she asked for her brother,
and now that he thought the brother and sister had been alone long enough, was coming to inquire
and offer his sympathy.

"Please, sir, I must go home," Tom said abruptly, as he met Mr. Stelling in the passage. "I
must go back with my sister directly. My father's lost his lawsuit--he's lost all his property--and
he's very ill."

Mr. Stelling felt like a kind-hearted man; he foresaw a probable money loss for himself, but
this had no appreciable share in his feeling, while he looked with grave pity at the brother
and sister for whom youth and sorrow had begun together. When he knew how Maggie had come,
and how eager she was to get home again, he hurried their departure, only whispering something
to Mrs. Stelling, who had followed him, and who immediately left the room.

Tom and Maggie were standing on the door-step, ready to set out, when Mrs. Stelling came with
a little basket, which she hung on Maggie's arm, saying: "Do remember to eat something on the
way, dear." Maggie's heart went out toward this woman whom she had never liked, and she kissed
her silently. It was the first sign within the poor child of that new sense which is the gift
of sorrow,--that susceptibility to the bare offices of humanity which raises them into a bond
of loving fellowship, as to haggard men among the ice-bergs the mere presence of an ordinary
comrade stirs the deep fountains of affection.

Mr. Stelling put his hand on Tom's shoulder and said: "God bless you, my boy; let me know how
you get on." Then he pressed Maggie's hand; but there were no audible good-byes. Tom had so
often thought how joyful he should be the day he left school "for good"! And now his school
years seemed like a holiday that had come to an end.

The two slight youthful figures soon grew indistinct on the distant road,--were soon lost behind
the projecting hedgerow.

They had gone forth together into their life of sorrow, and they would never more see the sunshine
undimmed by remembered cares. They had entered the thorny wilderness, and the golden gates
of their childhood had forever closed behind them.

Book III

The Downfall

Chapter I

What Had Happened at Home

When Mr. Tulliver first knew the fact that the law-suit was decided against him, and that Pivart
and Wakem were triumphant, every one who happened to observe him at the time thought that,
for so confident and hot-tempered a man, he bore the blow remarkably well. He thought so himself;
he thought he was going to show that if Wakem or anybody else considered him crushed, they
would find themselves mistaken. He could not refuse to see that the costs of this protracted
suit would take more than he possessed to pay them; but he appeared to himself to be full of
expedients by which he could ward off any results but such as were tolerable, and could avoid
the appearance of breaking down in the world. All the obstinacy and defiance of his nature,
driven out of their old channel, found a vent for themselves in the immediate formation of
plans by which he would meet his difficulties, and remain Mr. Tulliver of Dorlcote Mill in
spite of them. There was such a rush of projects in his brain, that it was no wonder his face
was flushed when he came away from his talk with his attorney, Mr. Gore, and mounted his horse
to ride home from Lindum. There was Furley, who held the mortgage on the land,--a reasonable
fellow, who would see his own interest, Mr. Tulliver was convinced, and who would be glad not
only to purchase the whole estate, including the mill and homestead, but would accept Mr. Tulliver
as tenant, and be willing to advance money to be repaid with high interest out of the profits
of the business, which would be made over to him, Mr. Tulliver only taking enough barely to
maintain himself and his family. Who would neglect such a profitable investment? Certainly
not Furley, for Mr. Tulliver had determined that Furley should meet his plans with the utmost
alacrity; and there are men whoses brains have not yet been dangerously heated by the loss
of a lawsuit, who are apt to see in their own interest or desires a motive for other men's
actions. There was no doubt (in the miller's mind) that Furley would do just what was desirable;
and if he did--why, things would not be so very much worse. Mr. Tulliver and his family must
live more meagrely and humbly, but it would only be till the profits of the business had paid
off Furley's advances, and that might be while Mr. Tulliver had still a good many years of
life before him. It was clear that the costs of the suit could be paid without his being obliged
to turn out of his old place, and look like a ruined man. It was certainly an awkward moment
in his affairs. There was that suretyship for poor Riley, who had died suddenly last April,
and left his friend saddled with a debt of two hundred and fifty pounds,--a fact which had
helped to make Mr. Tulliver's banking book less pleasant reading than a man might desire toward
Christmas. Well! he had never been one of those poor-spirited sneaks who would refuse to give
a helping hand to a fellow-traveller in this puzzling world. The really vexatious business
was the fact that some months ago the creditor who had lent him the five hundred pounds to
repay Mrs. Glegg had become uneasy about his money (set on by Wakem, of course), and Mr. Tulliver,
still confident that he should gain his suit, and finding it eminently inconvenient to raise
the said sum until that desirable issue had taken place, had rashly acceded to the demand that
he should give a bill of sale on his household furniture and some other effects, as security
in lieu of the bond. It was all one, he had said to himself; he should soon pay off the money,
and there was no harm in giving that security any more than another. But now the consequences
of this bill of sale occurred to him in a new light, and he remembered that the time was close
at hand when it would be enforced unless the money were repaid. Two months ago he would have
declared stoutly that he would never be beholden to his wife's friends; but now he told himself
as stoutly that it was nothing but right and natural that Bessy should go to the Pullets and
explain the thing to them; they would hardly let Bessy's furniture be sold, and it might be
security to Pullet if he advanced the money,--there would, after all, be no gift or favor in
the matter. Mr. Tulliver would never have asked for anything from so poor-spirited a fellow
for himself, but Bessy might do so if she liked.

It is precisely the proudest and most obstinate men who are the most liable to shift their
position and contradict themselves in this sudden manner; everything is easier to them than
to face the simple fact that they have been thoroughly defeated, and must begin life anew.
And Mr. Tulliver, you perceive, though nothing more than a superior miller and maltster, was
as proud and obstinate as if he had been a very lofty personage, in whom such dispositions
might be a source of that conspicuous, far-echoing tragedy, which sweeps the stage in regal
robes, and makes the dullest chronicler sublime. The pride and obstinacy of millers and other
insignificant people, whom you pass unnoticingly on the road every day, have their tragedy
too; but it is of that unwept, hidden sort that goes on from generation to generation, and
leaves no record,--such tragedy, perhaps, as lies in the conflicts of young souls, hungry for
joy, under a lot made suddenly hard to them, under the dreariness of a home where the morning
brings no promise with it, and where the unexpectant discontent of worn and disappointed parents
weighs on the children like a damp, thick air, in which all the functions of life are depressed;
or such tragedy as lies in the slow or sudden death that follows on a bruised passion, though
it may be a death that finds only a parish funeral. There are certain animals to which tenacity
of position is a law of life,--they can never flourish again, after a single wrench: and there
are certain human beings to whom predominance is a law of life,--they can only sustain humiliation
so long as they can refuse to believe in it, and, in their own conception, predominate still.

Mr. Tulliver was still predominating, in his own imagination, as he approached St. Ogg's, through
which he had to pass on his way homeward. But what was it that suggested to him, as he saw
the Laceham coach entering the town, to follow it to the coach-office, and get the clerk there
to write a letter, requiring Maggie to come home the very next day? Mr. Tulliver's own hand
shook too much under his excitement for him to write himself, and he wanted the letter to be
given to the coachman to deliver at Miss Firniss's school in the morning. There was a craving
which he would not account for to himself, to have Maggie near him, without delay,--she must
come back by the coach to-morrow.

To Mrs. Tulliver, when he got home, he would admit no difficulties, and scolded down her burst
of grief on hearing that the lawsuit was lost, by angry assertions that there was nothing to
grieve about. He said nothing to her that night about the bill of sale and the application
to Mrs. Pullet, for he had kept her in ignorance of the nature of that transaction, and had
explained the necessity for taking an inventory of the goods as a matter connected with his
will. The possession of a wife conspicuously one's inferior in intellect is, like other high
privileges, attended with a few inconveniences, and, among the rest, with the occasional necessity
for using a little deception.

The next day Mr. Tulliver was again on horseback in the afternoon, on his way to Mr. Gore's
office at St. Ogg's. Gore was to have seen Furley in the morning, and to have sounded him in
relation to Mr. Tulliver's affairs. But he had not gone half-way when he met a clerk from Mr.
Gore's office, who was bringing a letter to Mr. Tulliver. Mr. Gore had been prevented by a
sudden call of business from waiting at his office to see Mr. Tulliver, according to appointment,
but would be at his office at eleven to-morrow morning, and meanwhile had sent some important
information by letter.

"Oh!" said Mr. Tulliver, taking the letter, but not opening it. "Then tell Gore I'll see him
to-morrow at eleven"; and he turned his horse.

The clerk, struck with Mr. Tulliver's glistening, excited glance, looked after him for a few
moments, and then rode away. The reading of a letter was not the affair of an instant to Mr.
Tulliver; he took in the sense of a statement very slowly through the medium of written or
even printed characters; so he had put the letter in his pocket, thinking he would open it
in his armchair at home. But by-and-by it occurred to him that there might be something in
the letter Mrs. Tulliver must not know about, and if so, it would be better to keep it out
of her sight altogether. He stopped his horse, took out the letter, and read it. It was only
a short letter; the substance was, that Mr. Gore had ascertained, on secret, but sure authority,
that Furley had been lately much straitened for money, and had parted with his securities,--among
the rest, the mortgage on Mr. Tulliver's property, which he had transferred to----Wakem.

In half an hour after this Mr. Tulliver's own wagoner found him lying by the roadside insensible,
with an open letter near him, and his gray horse snuffing uneasily about him.

When Maggie reached home that evening, in obedience to her father's call, he was no longer
insensible. About an hour before he had become conscious, and after vague, vacant looks around
him, had muttered something about "a letter," which he presently repeated impatiently. At the
instance of Mr. Turnbull, the medical man, Gore's letter was brought and laid on the bed, and
the previous impatience seemed to be allayed. The stricken man lay for some time with his eyes
fixed on the letter, as if he were trying to knit up his thoughts by its help. But presently
a new wave of memory seemed to have come and swept the other away; he turned his eyes from
the letter to the door, and after looking uneasily, as if striving to see something his eyes
were too dim for, he said, "The little wench."

He repeated the words impatiently from time to time, appearing entirely unconscious of everything
except this one importunate want, and giving no sign of knowing his wife or any one else; and
poor Mrs. Tulliver, her feeble faculties almost paralyzed by this sudden accumulation of troubles,
went backward and forward to the gate to see if the Laceham coach were coming, though it was
not yet time.

But it came at last, and set down the poor anxious girl, no longer the "little wench," except
to her father's fond memory.

"Oh, mother, what is the matter?" Maggie said, with pale lips, as her mother came toward her
crying. She didn't think her father was ill, because the letter had come at his dictation from
the office at St. Ogg's.

But Mr. Turnbull came now to meet her; a medical man is the good angel of the troubled house,
and Maggie ran toward the kind old friend, whom she remembered as long as she could remember
anything, with a trembling, questioning look.

"Don't alarm yourself too much, my dear," he said, taking her hand. "Your father has had a
sudden attack, and has not quite recovered his memory. But he has been asking for you, and
it will do him good to see you. Keep as quiet as you can; take off your things, and come upstairs
with me."

Maggie obeyed, with that terrible beating of the heart which makes existence seem simply a
painful pulsation. The very quietness with which Mr. Turnbull spoke had frightened her susceptible
imagination. Her father's eyes were still turned uneasily toward the door when she entered
and met the strange, yearning, helpless look that had been seeking her in vain. With a sudden
flash and movement, he raised himself in the bed; she rushed toward him, and clasped him with
agonized kisses.

Poor child! it was very early for her to know one of those supreme moments in life when all
we have hoped or delighted in, all we can dread or endure, falls away from our regard as insignificant;
is lost, like a trivial memory, in that simple, primitive love which knits us to the beings
who have been nearest to us, in their times of helplessness or of anguish.

But that flash of recognition had been too great a strain on the father's bruised, enfeebled
powers. He sank back again in renewed insensibility and rigidity, which lasted for many hours,
and was only broken by a flickering return of consciousness, in which he took passively everything
that was given to him, and seemed to have a sort of infantine satisfaction in Maggie's near
presence,--such satisfaction as a baby has when it is returned to the nurse's lap.

Mrs. Tulliver sent for her sisters, and there was much wailing and lifting up of hands below
stairs. Both uncles and aunts saw that the ruin of Bessy and her family was as complete as
they had ever foreboded it, and there was a general family sense that a judgment had fallen
on Mr. Tulliver, which it would be an impiety to counteract by too much kindness. But Maggie
heard little of this, scarcely ever leaving her father's bedside, where she sat opposite him
with her hand on his. Mrs. Tulliver wanted to have Tom fetched home, and seemed to be thinking
more of her boy even than of her husband; but the aunts and uncles opposed this. Tom was better
at school, since Mr. Turnbull said there was no immediate danger, he believed. But at the end
of the second day, when Maggie had become more accustomed to her father's fits of insensibility,
and to the expectation that he would revive from them, the thought of Tom had become urgent
with her too; and when her mother sate crying at night and saying, "My poor lad--it's nothing
but right he should come home," Maggie said, "Let me go for him, and tell him, mother; I'll
go to-morrow morning if father doesn't know me and want me. It would be so hard for Tom to
come home and not know anything about it beforehand."

And the next morning Maggie went, as we have seen. Sitting on the coach on their way home,
the brother and sister talked to each other in sad, interrupted whispers.

"They say Mr. Wakem has got a mortgage or something on the land, Tom," said Maggie. "It was
the letter with that news in it that made father ill, they think."

"I believe that scoundrel's been planning all along to ruin my father," said Tom, leaping from
the vaguest impressions to a definite conclusion. "I'll make him feel for it when I'm a man.
Mind you never speak to Philip again."

"Oh, Tom!" said Maggie, in a tone of sad remonstrance; but she had no spirit to dispute anything
then, still less to vex Tom by opposing him.

Chapter II

Mrs. Tulliver's Teraphim, or Household Gods

When the coach set down Tom and Maggie, it was five hours since she had started from home,
and she was thinking with some trembling that her father had perhaps missed her, and asked
for "the little wench" in vain. She thought of no other change that might have happened.

She hurried along the gravel-walk and entered the house before Tom; but in the entrance she
was startled by a strong smell of tobacco. The parlor door was ajar; that was where the smell
came from. It was very strange; could any visitor be smoking at a time like this? Was her mother
there? If so, she must be told that Tom was come. Maggie, after this pause of surprise, was
only in the act of opening the door when Tom came up, and they both looked into the parlor
together.

There was a coarse, dingy man, of whose face Tom had some vague recollection, sitting in his
father's chair, smoking, with a jug and glass beside him.

The truth flashed on Tom's mind in an instant. To "have the bailiff in the house," and "to
be sold up," were phrases which he had been used to, even as a little boy; they were part of
the disgrace and misery of "failing," of losing all one's money, and being ruined,--sinking
into the condition of poor working people. It seemed only natural this should happen, since
his father had lost all his property, and he thought of no more special cause for this particular
form of misfortune than the loss of the lawsuit. But the immediate presence of this disgrace
was so much keener an experience to Tom than the worst form of apprehension, that he felt at
this moment as if his real trouble had only just begin; it was a touch on the irritated nerve
compared with its spontaneous dull aching.

"How do you do, sir?" said the man, taking the pipe out of his mouth, with rough, embarrassed
civility. The two young startled faces made him a little uncomfortable.

But Tom turned away hastily without speaking; the sight was too hateful. Maggie had not understood
the appearance of this stranger, as Tom had. She followed him, whispering: "Who can it be,
Tom? What is the matter?" Then, with a sudden undefined dread lest this stranger might have
something to do with a change in her father, she rushed upstairs, checking herself at the bedroom
door to throw off her bonnet, and enter on tiptoe. All was silent there; her father was lying,
heedless of everything around him, with his eyes closed as when she had left him. A servant
was there, but not her mother.

"Where's my mother?" she whispered. The servant did not know.

Maggie hastened out, and said to Tom; "Father is lying quiet; let us go and look for my mother.
I wonder where she is."

Mrs. Tulliver was not downstairs, not in any of the bedrooms. There was but one room below
the attic which Maggie had left unsearched; it was the storeroom, where her mother kept all
her linen and all the precious "best things" that were only unwrapped and brought out on special
occasions.

Tom, preceding Maggie, as they returned along the passage, opened the door of this room, and
immediately said, "Mother!"

Mrs. Tulliver was seated there with all her laid-up treasures. One of the linen chests was
open; the silver teapot was unwrapped from its many folds of paper, and the best china was
laid out on the top of the closed linen-chest; spoons and skewers and ladles were spread in
rows on the shelves; and the poor woman was shaking her head and weeping, with a bitter tension
of the mouth, over the mark, "Elizabeth Dodson," on the corner of some tablecloths she held
in her lap.

She dropped them, and started up as Tom spoke.

"Oh, my boy, my boy!" she said, clasping him round the neck. "To think as I should live to
see this day! We're ruined--everything's going to be sold up--to think as your father should
ha' married me to bring me to this! We've got nothing--we shall be beggars--we must go to the
workhouse----"

She kissed him, then seated herself again, and took another tablecloth on her lap, unfolding
it a little way to look at the pattern, while the children stood by in mute wretchedness, their
minds quite filled for the moment with the words "beggars" and "workhouse."

"To think o' these cloths as I spun myself," she went on, lifting things out and turning them
over with an excitement all the more strange and piteous because the stout blond woman was
usually so passive,--if she had been ruffled before, it was at the surface merely,--"and Job
Haxey wove 'em, and brought the piece home on his back, as I remember standing at the door
and seeing him come, before I ever thought o' marrying your father! And the pattern as I chose
myself, and bleached so beautiful, and I marked 'em so as nobody ever saw such marking,--they
must cut the cloth to get it out, for it's a particular stitch. And they're all to be sold,
and go into strange people's houses, and perhaps be cut with the knives, and wore out before
I'm dead. You'll never have one of 'em, my boy," she said, looking up at Tom with her eyes
full of tears, "and I meant 'em for you. I wanted you to have all o' this pattern. Maggie could
have had the large check--it never shows so well when the dishes are on it."

Tom was touched to the quick, but there was an angry reaction immediately. His face flushed
as he said:

"But will my aunts let them be sold, mother? Do they know about it? They'll never let your
linen go, will they? Haven't you sent to them?"

"Yes, I sent Luke directly they'd put the bailies in, and your aunt Pullet's been--and, oh
dear, oh dear, she cries so and says your father's disgraced my family and made it the talk
o' the country; and she'll buy the spotted cloths for herself, because she's never had so many
as she wanted o' that pattern, and they sha'n't go to strangers, but she's got more checks
a'ready nor she can do with." (Here Mrs. Tulliver began to lay back the tablecloths in the
chest, folding and stroking them automatically.) "And your uncle Glegg's been too, and he says
things must be bought in for us to lie down on, but he must talk to your aunt; and they're
all coming to consult. But I know they'll none of 'em take my chany," she added, turning toward
the cups and saucers, "for they all found fault with 'em when I bought 'em, 'cause o' the small
gold sprig all over 'em, between the flowers. But there's none of 'em got better chany, not
even your aunt Pullet herself; and I bought it wi' my own money as I'd saved ever since I was
turned fifteen; and the silver teapot, too,--your father never paid for 'em. And to think as
he should ha' married me, and brought me to this."

Mrs. Tulliver burst out crying afresh, and she sobbed with her handkerchief at her eyes a few
moments, but then removing it, she said in a deprecating way, still half sobbing, as if she
were called upon to speak before she could command her voice,--

"And I did say to him times and times, 'Whativer you do, don't go to law,' and what more could
I do? I've had to sit by while my own fortin's been spent, and what should ha' been my children's,
too. You'll have niver a penny, my boy--but it isn't your poor mother's fault."

She put out one arm toward Tom, looking up at him piteously with her helpless, childish blue
eyes. The poor lad went to her and kissed her, and she clung to him. For the first time Tom
thought of his father with some reproach. His natural inclination to blame, hitherto kept entirely
in abeyance toward his father by the predisposition to think him always right, simply on the
ground that he was Tom Tulliver's father, was turned into this new channel by his mother's
plaints; and with his indignation against Wakem there began to mingle some indignation of another
sort. Perhaps his father might have helped bringing them all down in the world, and making
people talk of them with contempt, but no one should talk long of Tom Tulliver with contempt.

The natural strength and firmness of his nature was beginning to assert itself, urged by the
double stimulus of resentment against his aunts, and the sense that he must behave like a man
and take care of his mother.

"Don't fret, mother," he said tenderly. "I shall soon be able to get money; I'll get a situation
of some sort."

"Bless you, my boy!" said Mrs. Tulliver, a little soothed. Then, looking round sadly, "But
I shouldn't ha' minded so much if we could ha' kept the things wi' my name on 'em."

Maggie had witnessed this scene with gathering anger. The implied reproaches against her father--her
father, who was lying there in a sort of living death--neutralized all her pity for griefs
about tablecloths and china; and her anger on her father's account was heightened by some egoistic
resentment at Tom's silent concurrence with her mother in shutting her out from the common
calamity. She had become almost indifferent to her mother's habitual depreciation of her, but
she was keenly alive to any sanction of it, however passive, that she might suspect in Tom.
Poor Maggie was by no means made up of unalloyed devotedness, but put forth large claims for
herself where she loved strongly. She burst out at last in an agitated, almost violent tone:
"Mother, how can you talk so; as if you cared only for things with your name on, and not for
what has my father's name too; and to care about anything but dear father himself!--when he's
lying there, and may never speak to us again. Tom, you ought to say so too; you ought not to
let any one find fault with my father."

Maggie, almost choked with mingled grief and anger, left the room, and took her old place on
her father's bed. Her heart went out to him with a stronger movement than ever, at the thought
that people would blame him. Maggie hated blame; she had been blamed all her life, and nothing
had come of it but evil tempers.

Her father had always defended and excused her, and her loving remembrance of his tenderness
was a force within her that would enable her to do or bear anything for his sake.

Tom was a little shocked at Maggie's outburst,--telling him as well as his mother what it was
right to do! She ought to have learned better than have those hectoring, assuming manners,
by this time. But he presently went into his father's room, and the sight there touched him
in a way that effaced the slighter impressions of the previous hour. When Maggie saw how he
was moved, she went to him and put her arm round his neck as he sat by the bed, and the two
children forgot everything else in the sense that they had one father and one sorrow.

Chapter III

The Family Council

It was at eleven o'clock the next morning that the aunts and uncles came to hold their consultation.
The fire was lighted in the large parlor, and poor Mrs. Tulliver, with a confused impression
that it was a great occasion, like a funeral, unbagged the bell-rope tassels, and unpinned
the curtains, adjusting them in proper folds, looking round and shaking her head sadly at the
polished tops and legs of the tables, which sister Pullet herself could not accuse of insufficient
brightness.

Mr. Deane was not coming, he was away on business; but Mrs. Deane appeared punctually in that
handsome new gig with the head to it, and the livery-servant driving it, which had thrown so
clear a light on several traits in her character to some of her female friends in St. Ogg's.
Mr. Deane had been advancing in the world as rapidly as Mr. Tulliver had been going down in
it; and in Mrs. Deane's house the Dodson linen and plate were beginning to hold quite a subordinate
position, as a mere supplement to the handsomer articles of the same kind, purchased in recent
years,--a change which had caused an occasional coolness in the sisterly intercourse between
her and Mrs. Glegg, who felt that Susan was getting "like the rest," and there would soon be
little of the true Dodson spirit surviving except in herself, and, it might be hoped, in those
nephews who supported the Dodson name on the family land, far away in the Wolds.

People who live at a distance are naturally less faulty than those immediately under our own
eyes; and it seems superfluous, when we consider the remote geographical position of the Ethiopians,
and how very little the Greeks had to do with them, to inquire further why Homer calls them
"blameless."

Mrs. Deane was the first to arrive; and when she had taken her seat in the large parlor, Mrs.
Tulliver came down to her with her comely face a little distorted, nearly as it would have
been if she had been crying. She was not a woman who could shed abundant tears, except in moments
when the prospect of losing her furniture became unusually vivid, but she felt how unfitting
it was to be quite calm under present circumstances.

"Oh, sister, what a world this is!" she exclaimed as she entered; "what trouble, oh dear!"

Mrs. Deane was a thin-lipped woman, who made small well-considered speeches on peculiar occasions,
repeating them afterward to her husband, and asking him if she had not spoken very properly.

"Yes, sister," she said deliberately, "this is a changing world, and we don't know to-day what
may happen tomorrow. But it's right to be prepared for all things, and if trouble's sent, to
remember as it isn't sent without a cause. I'm very sorry for you as a sister, and if the doctor
orders jelly for Mr. Tulliver, I hope you'll let me know. I'll send it willingly; for it is
but right he should have proper attendance while he's ill."

"Thank you, Susan," said Mrs. Tulliver, rather faintly, withdrawing her fat hand from her sister's
thin one. "But there's been no talk o' jelly yet." Then after a moment's pause she added, "There's
a dozen o' cut jelly-glasses upstairs--I shall never put jelly into 'em no more."

Her voice was rather agitated as she uttered the last words, but the sound of wheels diverted
her thoughts. Mr. and Mrs. Glegg were come, and were almost immediately followed by Mr. and
Mrs. Pullet.

Mrs. Pullet entered crying, as a compendious mode, at all times, of expressing what were her
views of life in general, and what, in brief, were the opinions she held concerning the particular
case before her.

Mrs. Glegg had on her fuzziest front, and garments which appeared to have had a recent resurrection
from rather a creasy form of burial; a costume selected with the high moral purpose of instilling
perfect humility into Bessy and her children.

"Mrs. G., won't you come nearer the fire?" said her husband, unwilling to take the more comfortable
seat without offering it to her.

"You see I've seated myself here, Mr. Glegg," returned this superior woman; "you can roast
yourself, if you like."

"Well," said Mr. Glegg, seating himself good-humoredly, "and how's the poor man upstairs?"

"Dr. Turnbull thought him a deal better this morning," said Mrs. Tulliver; "he took more notice,
and spoke to me; but he's never known Tom yet,--looks at the poor lad as if he was a stranger,
though he said something once about Tom and the pony. The doctor says his memory's gone a long
way back, and he doesn't know Tom because he's thinking of him when he was little. Eh dear,
eh dear!"

"I doubt it's the water got on his brain," said aunt Pullet, turning round from adjusting her
cap in a melancholy way at the pier-glass. "It's much if he ever gets up again; and if he does,
he'll most like be childish, as Mr. Carr was, poor man! They fed him with a spoon as if he'd
been a babby for three year. He'd quite lost the use of his limbs; but then he'd got a Bath
chair, and somebody to draw him; and that's what you won't have, I doubt, Bessy."

"Sister Pullet," said Mrs. Glegg, severely, "if I understand right, we've come together this
morning to advise and consult about what's to be done in this disgrace as has fallen upon the
family, and not to talk o' people as don't belong to us. Mr. Carr was none of our blood, nor
noways connected with us, as I've ever heared."

"Sister Glegg," said Mrs. Pullet, in a pleading tone, drawing on her gloves again, and stroking
the fingers in an agitated manner, "if you've got anything disrespectful to say o' Mr. Carr,
I do beg of you as you won't say it to me. I know what he was," she added, with a sigh; "his
breath was short to that degree as you could hear him two rooms off."

"Sophy!" said Mrs. Glegg, with indignant disgust, "you do talk o' people's complaints till
it's quite undecent. But I say again, as I said before, I didn't come away from home to talk
about acquaintances, whether they'd short breath or long. If we aren't come together for one
to hear what the other 'ull do to save a sister and her children from the parish, I shall go
back. One can't act without the other, I suppose; it isn't to be expected as I should do everything."

"Well, Jane," said Mrs. Pullet, "I don't see as you've been so very forrard at doing. So far
as I know, this is the first time as here you've been, since it's been known as the bailiff's
in the house; and I was here yesterday, and looked at all Bessy's linen and things, and I told
her I'd buy in the spotted tablecloths. I couldn't speak fairer; for as for the teapot as she
doesn't want to go out o' the family, it stands to sense I can't do with two silver teapots,
not if it hadn't a straight spout, but the spotted damask I was allays fond on."

"I wish it could be managed so as my teapot and chany and the best castors needn't be put up
for sale," said poor Mrs. Tulliver, beseechingly, "and the sugar-tongs the first things ever
I bought."

"But that can't be helped, you know," said Mr. Glegg. "If one o' the family chooses to buy
'em in, they can, but one thing must be bid for as well as another."

"And it isn't to be looked for," said uncle Pullet, with unwonted independence of idea, "as
your own family should pay more for things nor they'll fetch. They may go for an old song by
auction."

"Oh dear, oh dear," said Mrs. Tulliver, "to think o' my chany being sold i' that way, and I
bought it when I was married, just as you did yours, Jane and Sophy; and I know you didn't
like mine, because o' the sprig, but I was fond of it; and there's never been a bit broke,
for I've washed it myself; and there's the tulips on the cups, and the roses, as anybody might
go and look at 'em for pleasure. You wouldn't like your chany to go for an old song and be
broke to pieces, though yours has got no color in it, Jane,--it's all white and fluted, and
didn't cost so much as mine. And there's the castors, sister Deane, I can't think but you'd
like to have the castors, for I've heard you say they're pretty."

"Well, I've no objection to buy some of the best things," said Mrs. Deane, rather loftily;
"we can do with extra things in our house."

"Best things!" exclaimed Mrs. Glegg, with severity, which had gathered intensity from her long
silence. "It drives me past patience to hear you all talking o' best things, and buying in
this, that, and the other, such as silver and chany. You must bring your mind to your circumstances,
Bessy, and not be thinking o' silver and chany; but whether you shall get so much as a flock-bed
to lie on, and a blanket to cover you, and a stool to sit on. You must remember, if you get
'em, it'll be because your friends have bought 'em for you, for you're dependent upon them
for everything; for your husband lies there helpless, and hasn't got a penny i' the world to
call his own. And it's for your own good I say this, for it's right you should feel what your
state is, and what disgrace your husband's brought on your own family, as you've got to look
to for everything, and be humble in your mind."

Mrs. Glegg paused, for speaking with much energy for the good of others is naturally exhausting.

Mrs. Tulliver, always borne down by the family predominance of sister Jane, who had made her
wear the yoke of a younger sister in very tender years, said pleadingly:

"I'm sure, sister, I've never asked anybody to do anything, only buy things as it 'ud be a
pleasure to 'em to have, so as they mightn't go and be spoiled i' strange houses. I never asked
anybody to buy the things in for me and my children; though there's the linen I spun, and I
thought when Tom was born,--I thought one o' the first things when he was lying i' the cradle,
as all the things I'd bought wi' my own money, and been so careful of, 'ud go to him. But I've
said nothing as I wanted my sisters to pay their money for me. What my husband has done for
his sister's unknown, and we should ha' been better off this day if it hadn't been as he's
lent money and never asked for it again."

"Come, come," said Mr. Glegg, kindly, "don't let us make things too dark. What's done can't
be undone. We shall make a shift among us to buy what's sufficient for you; though, as Mrs.
G. says, they must be useful, plain things. We mustn't be thinking o' what's unnecessary. A
table, and a chair or two, and kitchen things, and a good bed, and such-like. Why, I've seen
the day when I shouldn't ha' known myself if I'd lain on sacking i'stead o' the floor. We get
a deal o' useless things about us, only because we've got the money to spend."

"Mr. Glegg," said Mrs. G., "if you'll be kind enough to let me speak, i'stead o' taking the
words out o' my mouth,--I was going to say, Bessy, as it's fine talking for you to say as you've
never asked us to buy anything for you; let me tell you, you ought to have asked us. Pray,
how are you to be purvided for, if your own family don't help you? You must go to the parish,
if they didn't. And you ought to know that, and keep it in mind, and ask us humble to do what
we can for you, i'stead o' saying, and making a boast, as you've never asked us for anything."

"You talked o' the Mosses, and what Mr. Tulliver's done for 'em," said uncle Pullet, who became
unusually suggestive where advances of money were concerned. "Haven't they been anear you?
They ought to do something as well as other folks; and if he's lent 'em money, they ought to
be made to pay it back."

"Yes, to be sure," said Mrs. Deane; "I've been thinking so. How is it Mr. and Mrs. Moss aren't
here to meet us? It is but right they should do their share."

"Oh, dear!" said Mrs. Tulliver, "I never sent 'em word about Mr. Tulliver, and they live so
back'ard among the lanes at Basset, they niver hear anything only when Mr. Moss comes to market.
But I niver gave 'em a thought. I wonder Maggie didn't, though, for she was allays so fond
of her aunt Moss."

"Why don't your children come in, Bessy?" said Mrs. Pullet, at the mention of Maggie. "They
should hear what their aunts and uncles have got to say; and Maggie,--when it's me as have
paid for half her schooling, she ought to think more of her aunt Pullet than of aunt Moss.
I may go off sudden when I get home to-day; there's no telling."

"If I'd had my way," said Mrs. Glegg, "the children 'ud ha' been in the room from the first.
It's time they knew who they've to look to, and it's right as somebody should talk to 'em,
and let 'em know their condition i' life, and what they're come down to, and make 'em feel
as they've got to suffer for their father's faults."

"Well, I'll go and fetch 'em, sister," said Mrs. Tulliver, resignedly. She was quite crushed
now, and thought of the treasures in the storeroom with no other feeling than blank despair.

She went upstairs to fetch Tom and Maggie, who were both in their father's room, and was on
her way down again, when the sight of the storeroom door suggested a new thought to her. She
went toward it, and left the children to go down by themselves.

The aunts and uncles appeared to have been in warm discussion when the brother and sister entered,--both
with shrinking reluctance; for though Tom, with a practical sagacity which had been roused
into activity by the strong stimulus of the new emotions he had undergone since yesterday,
had been turning over in his mind a plan which he meant to propose to one of his aunts or uncles,
he felt by no means amicably toward them, and dreaded meeting them all at once as he would
have dreaded a large dose of concentrated physic, which was but just endurable in small draughts.
As for Maggie, she was peculiarly depressed this morning; she had been called up, after brief
rest, at three o'clock, and had that strange dreamy weariness which comes from watching in
a sick-room through the chill hours of early twilight and breaking day,--in which the outside
day-light life seems to have no importance, and to be a mere margin to the hours in the darkened
chamber. Their entrance interrupted the conversation. The shaking of hands was a melancholy
and silent ceremony, till uncle Pullet observed, as Tom approached him:

"Well, young sir, we've been talking as we should want your pen and ink; you can write rarely
now, after all your schooling, I should think."

"Ay, ay," said uncle Glegg, with admonition which he meant to be kind, "we must look to see
the good of all this schooling, as your father's sunk so much money in, now,--

  'When land is gone and money's spent,
  Then learning is most excellent.'

Now's the time, Tom, to let us see the good o' your learning. Let us see whether you can do
better than I can, as have made my fortin without it. But I began wi' doing with little, you
see; I could live on a basin o' porridge and a crust o' bread-and-cheese. But I doubt high
living and high learning 'ull make it harder for you, young man, nor it was for me."

"But he must do it," interposed aunt Glegg, energetically, "whether it's hard or no. He hasn't
got to consider what's hard; he must consider as he isn't to trusten to his friends to keep
him in idleness and luxury; he's got to bear the fruits of his father's misconduct, and bring
his mind to fare hard and to work hard. And he must be humble and grateful to his aunts and
uncles for what they're doing for his mother and father, as must be turned out into the streets
and go to the workhouse if they didn't help 'em. And his sister, too," continued Mrs. Glegg,
looking severely at Maggie, who had sat down on the sofa by her aunt Deane, drawn to her by
the sense that she was Lucy's mother, "she must make up her mind to be humble and work; for
there'll be no servants to wait on her any more,--she must remember that. She must do the work
o' the house, and she must respect and love her aunts as have done so much for her, and saved
their money to leave to their nepheys and nieces."

Tom was still standing before the table in the centre of the group. There was a heightened
color in his face, and he was very far from looking humbled, but he was preparing to say, in
a respectful tone, something he had previously meditated, when the door opened and his mother
re-entered.

Poor Mrs. Tulliver had in her hands a small tray, on which she had placed her silver teapot,
a specimen teacup and saucer, the castors, and sugar-tongs.

"See here, sister," she said, looking at Mrs. Deane, as she set the tray on the table, "I thought,
perhaps, if you looked at the teapot again,--it's a good while since you saw it,--you might
like the pattern better; it makes beautiful tea, and there's a stand and everything; you might
use it for every day, or else lay it by for Lucy when she goes to housekeeping. I should be
so loath for 'em to buy it at the Golden Lion," said the poor woman, her heart swelling, and
the tears coming,--"my teapot as I bought when I was married, and to think of its being scratched,
and set before the travellers and folks, and my letters on it,--see here, E. D.,--and everybody
to see 'em."

"Ah, dear, dear!" said aunt Pullet, shaking her head with deep sadness, "it's very bad,--to
think o' the family initials going about everywhere--it niver was so before; you're a very
unlucky sister, Bessy. But what's the use o' buying the teapot, when there's the linen and
spoons and everything to go, and some of 'em with your full name,--and when it's got that straight
spout, too."

"As to disgrace o' the family," said Mrs. Glegg, "that can't be helped wi' buying teapots.
The disgrace is, for one o' the family to ha' married a man as has brought her to beggary.
The disgrace is, as they're to be sold up. We can't hinder the country from knowing that."

Maggie had started up from the sofa at the allusion to her father, but Tom saw her action and
flushed face in time to prevent her from speaking. "Be quiet, Maggie," he said authoritatively,
pushing her aside. It was a remarkable manifestation of self-command and practical judgment
in a lad of fifteen, that when his aunt Glegg ceased, he began to speak in a quiet and respectful
manner, though with a good deal of trembling in his voice; for his mother's words had cut him
to the quick.

"Then, aunt," he said, looking straight at Mrs. Glegg, "if you think it's a disgrace to the
family that we should be sold up, wouldn't it be better to prevent it altogether? And if you
and aunt Pullet," he continued, looking at the latter, "think of leaving any money to me and
Maggie, wouldn't it be better to give it now, and pay the debt we're going to be sold up for,
and save my mother from parting with her furniture?"

There was silence for a few moments, for every one, including Maggie, was astonished at Tom's
sudden manliness of tone. Uncle Glegg was the first to speak.

"Ay, ay, young man, come now! You show some notion o' things. But there's the interest, you
must remember; your aunts get five per cent on their money, and they'd lose that if they advanced
it; you haven't thought o' that."

"I could work and pay that every year," said Tom, promptly. "I'd do anything to save my mother
from parting with her things."

"Well done!" said uncle Glegg, admiringly. He had been drawing Tom out, rather than reflecting
on the practicability of his proposal. But he had produced the unfortunate result of irritating
his wife."

"Yes, Mr. Glegg!" said that lady, with angry sarcasm. "It's pleasant work for you to be giving
my money away, as you've pretended to leave at my own disposal. And my money, as was my own
father's gift, and not yours, Mr. Glegg; and I've saved it, and added to it myself, and had
more to put out almost every year, and it's to go and be sunk in other folks' furniture, and
encourage 'em in luxury and extravagance as they've no means of supporting; and I'm to alter
my will, or have a codicil made, and leave two or three hundred less behind me when I die,--me
as have allays done right and been careful, and the eldest o' the family; and my money's to
go and be squandered on them as have had the same chance as me, only they've been wicked and
wasteful. Sister Pullet, you may do as you like, and you may let your husband rob you back
again o' the money he's given you, but that isn't my sperrit."

"La, Jane, how fiery you are!" said Mrs. Pullet. "I'm sure you'll have the blood in your head,
and have to be cupped. I'm sorry for Bessy and her children,--I'm sure I think of 'em o' nights
dreadful, for I sleep very bad wi' this new medicine,--but it's no use for me to think o' doing
anything, if you won't meet me half-way."

"Why, there's this to be considered," said Mr. Glegg. "It's no use to pay off this debt and
save the furniture, when there's all the law debts behind, as 'ud take every shilling, and
more than could be made out o' land and stock, for I've made that out from Lawyer Gore. We'd
need save our money to keep the poor man with, instead o' spending it on furniture as he can
neither eat nor drink. You will be so hasty, Jane, as if I didn't know what was reasonable."

"Then speak accordingly, Mr. Glegg!" said his wife, with slow, loud emphasis, bending her head
toward him significantly.

Tom's countenance had fallen during this conversation, and his lip quivered; but he was determined
not to give way. He would behave like a man. Maggie, on the contrary, after her momentary delight
in Tom's speech, had relapsed into her state of trembling indignation. Her mother had been
standing close by Tom's side, and had been clinging to his arm ever since he had last spoken;
Maggie suddenly started up and stood in front of them, her eyes flashing like the eyes of a
young lioness.

"Why do you come, then," she burst out, "talking and interfering with us and scolding us, if
you don't mean to do anything to help my poor mother--your own sister,--if you've no feeling
for her when she's in trouble, and won't part with anything, though you would never miss it,
to save her from pain? Keep away from us then, and don't come to find fault with my father,--he
was better than any of you; he was kind,--he would have helped you, if you had been in trouble.
Tom and I don't ever want to have any of your money, if you won't help my mother. We'd rather
not have it! We'll do without you."

Maggie, having hurled her defiance at aunts and uncles in this way, stood still, with her large
dark eyes glaring at them, as if she were ready to await all consequences.

Mrs. Tulliver was frightened; there was something portentous in this mad outbreak; she did
not see how life could go on after it. Tom was vexed; it was no use to talk so. The aunts were
silent with surprise for some moments. At length, in a case of aberration such as this, comment
presented itself as more expedient than any answer.

"You haven't seen the end o' your trouble wi' that child, Bessy," said Mrs. Pullet; "she's
beyond everything for boldness and unthankfulness. It's dreadful. I might ha' let alone paying
for her schooling, for she's worse nor ever."

"It's no more than what I've allays said," followed Mrs. Glegg. "Other folks may be surprised,
but I'm not. I've said over and over again,--years ago I've said,--'Mark my words; that child
'ull come to no good; there isn't a bit of our family in her.' And as for her having so much
schooling, I never thought well o' that. I'd my reasons when I said I wouldn't pay anything
toward it."

"Come, come," said Mr. Glegg, "let's waste no more time in talking,--let's go to business.
Tom, now, get the pen and ink----"

While Mr. Glegg was speaking, a tall dark figure was seen hurrying past the window.

"Why, there's Mrs. Moss," said Mrs. Tulliver. "The bad news must ha' reached her, then"; and
she went out to open the door, Maggie eagerly following her.

"That's fortunate," said Mrs. Glegg. "She can agree to the list o' things to be bought in.
It's but right she should do her share when it's her own brother."

Mrs. Moss was in too much agitation to resist Mrs. Tulliver's movement, as she drew her into
the parlor automatically, without reflecting that it was hardly kind to take her among so many
persons in the first painful moment of arrival. The tall, worn, dark-haired woman was a strong
contrast to the Dodson sisters as she entered in her shabby dress, with her shawl and bonnet
looking as if they had been hastily huddled on, and with that entire absence of self-consciousness
which belongs to keenly felt trouble. Maggie was clinging to her arm; and Mrs. Moss seemed
to notice no one else except Tom, whom she went straight up to and took by the hand.

"Oh, my dear children," she burst out, "you've no call to think well o' me; I'm a poor aunt
to you, for I'm one o' them as take all and give nothing. How's my poor brother?"

"Mr. Turnbull thinks he'll get better," said Maggie. "Sit down, aunt Gritty. Don't fret."

"Oh, my sweet child, I feel torn i' two," said Mrs. Moss, allowing Maggie to lead her to the
sofa, but still not seeming to notice the presence of the rest. "We've three hundred pounds
o' my brother's money, and now he wants it, and you all want it, poor things!--and yet we must
be sold up to pay it, and there's my poor children,--eight of 'em, and the little un of all
can't speak plain. And I feel as if I was a robber. But I'm sure I'd no thought as my brother----"

The poor woman was interrupted by a rising sob.

"Three hundred pounds! oh dear, dear," said Mrs. Tulliver, who, when she had said that her
husband had done "unknown" things for his sister, had not had any particular sum in her mind,
and felt a wife's irritation at having been kept in the dark.

"What madness, to be sure!" said Mrs. Glegg. "A man with a family! He'd no right to lend his
money i' that way; and without security, I'll be bound, if the truth was known."

Mrs. Glegg's voice had arrested Mrs. Moss's attention, and looking up, she said:

"Yes, there was security; my husband gave a note for it. We're not that sort o' people, neither
of us, as 'ud rob my brother's children; and we looked to paying back the money, when the times
got a bit better."

"Well, but now," said Mr. Glegg, gently, "hasn't your husband no way o' raising this money?
Because it 'ud be a little fortin, like, for these folks, if we can do without Tulliver's being
made a bankrupt. Your husband's got stock; it is but right he should raise the money, as it
seems to me,--not but what I'm sorry for you, Mrs. Moss."

"Oh, sir, you don't know what bad luck my husband's had with his stock. The farm's suffering
so as never was for want o' stock; and we've sold all the wheat, and we're behind with our
rent,--not but what we'd like to do what's right, and I'd sit up and work half the night, if
it 'ud be any good; but there's them poor children,--four of 'em such little uns----"

"Don't cry so, aunt; don't fret," whispered Maggie, who had kept hold of Mrs. Moss's hand.

"Did Mr. Tulliver let you have the money all at once?" said Mrs. Tulliver, still lost in the
conception of things which had been "going on" without her knowledge.

"No; at twice," said Mrs. Moss, rubbing her eyes and making an effort to restrain her tears.
"The last was after my bad illness four years ago, as everything went wrong, and there was
a new note made then. What with illness and bad luck, I've been nothing but cumber all my life."

"Yes, Mrs. Moss," said Mrs. Glegg, with decision, "yours is a very unlucky family; the more's
the pity for my sister."

"I set off in the cart as soon as ever I heard o' what had happened," said Mrs. Moss, looking
at Mrs. Tulliver. "I should never ha' stayed away all this while, if you'd thought well to
let me know. And it isn't as I'm thinking all about ourselves, and nothing about my brother,
only the money was so on my mind, I couldn't help speaking about it. And my husband and me
desire to do the right thing, sir," she added, looking at Mr. Glegg, "and we'll make shift
and pay the money, come what will, if that's all my brother's got to trust to. We've been used
to trouble, and don't look for much else. It's only the thought o' my poor children pulls me
i' two."

"Why, there's this to be thought on, Mrs. Moss," said Mr. Glegg, "and it's right to warn you,--if
Tulliver's made a bankrupt, and he's got a note-of-hand of your husband's for three hundred
pounds, you'll be obliged to pay it; th' assignees 'ull come on you for it."

"Oh dear, oh dear!" said Mrs. Tulliver, thinking of the bankruptcy, and not of Mrs. Moss's
concern in it. Poor Mrs. Moss herself listened in trembling submission, while Maggie looked
with bewildered distress at Tom to see if he showed any signs of understanding this trouble,
and caring about poor aunt Moss. Tom was only looking thoughtful, with his eyes on the tablecloth.

"And if he isn't made bankrupt," continued Mr. Glegg, "as I said before, three hundred pounds
'ud be a little fortin for him, poor man. We don't know but what he may be partly helpless,
if he ever gets up again. I'm very sorry if it goes hard with you, Mrs. Moss, but my opinion
is, looking at it one way, it'll be right for you to raise the money; and looking at it th'
other way, you'll be obliged to pay it. You won't think ill o' me for speaking the truth."

"Uncle," said Tom, looking up suddenly from his meditative view of the tablecloth, "I don't
think it would be right for my aunt Moss to pay the money if it would be against my father's
will for her to pay it; would it?"

Mr. Glegg looked surprised for a moment or two before he said: "Why, no, perhaps not, Tom;
but then he'd ha' destroyed the note, you know. We must look for the note. What makes you think
it 'ud be against his will?"

"Why," said Tom, coloring, but trying to speak firmly, in spite of a boyish tremor, "I remember
quite well, before I went to school to Mr. Stelling, my father said to me one night, when we
were sitting by the fire together, and no one else was in the room----"

Tom hesitated a little, and then went on.

"He said something to me about Maggie, and then he said: 'I've always been good to my sister,
though she married against my will, and I've lent Moss money; but I shall never think of distressing
him to pay it; I'd rather lose it. My children must not mind being the poorer for that.' And
now my father's ill, and not able to speak for himself, I shouldn't like anything to be done
contrary to what he said to me."

"Well, but then, my boy," said Uncle Glegg, whose good feeling led him to enter into Tom's
wish, but who could not at once shake off his habitual abhorrence of such recklessness as destroying
securities, or alienating anything important enough to make an appreciable difference in a
man's property, "we should have to make away wi' the note, you know, if we're to guard against
what may happen, supposing your father's made bankrupt----"

"Mr. Glegg," interrupted his wife, severely, "mind what you're saying. You're putting yourself
very forrard in other folks's business. If you speak rash, don't say it was my fault."

"That's such a thing as I never heared of before," said uncle Pullet, who had been making haste
with his lozenge in order to express his amazement,--"making away with a note! I should think
anybody could set the constable on you for it."

"Well, but," said Mrs. Tulliver, "if the note's worth all that money, why can't we pay it away,
and save my things from going away? We've no call to meddle with your uncle and aunt Moss,
Tom, if you think your father 'ud be angry when he gets well."

Mrs. Tulliver had not studied the question of exchange, and was straining her mind after original
ideas on the subject.

"Pooh, pooh, pooh! you women don't understand these things," said uncle Glegg. "There's no
way o' making it safe for Mr. and Mrs. Moss but destroying the note."

"Then I hope you'll help me do it, uncle," said Tom, earnestly. "If my father shouldn't get
well, I should be very unhappy to think anything had been done against his will that I could
hinder. And I'm sure he meant me to remember what he said that evening. I ought to obey my
father's wish about his property."

Even Mrs. Glegg could not withhold her approval from Tom's words; she felt that the Dodson
blood was certainly speaking in him, though, if his father had been a Dodson, there would never
have been this wicked alienation of money. Maggie would hardly have restrained herself from
leaping on Tom's neck, if her aunt Moss had not prevented her by herself rising and taking
Tom's hand, while she said, with rather a choked voice:

"You'll never be the poorer for this, my dear boy, if there's a God above; and if the money's
wanted for your father, Moss and me 'ull pay it, the same as if there was ever such security.
We'll do as we'd be done by; for if my children have got no other luck, they've got an honest
father and mother."

"Well," said Mr. Glegg, who had been meditating after Tom's words, "we shouldn't be doing any
wrong by the creditors, supposing your father was bankrupt. I've been thinking o' that, for
I've been a creditor myself, and seen no end o' cheating. If he meant to give your aunt the
money before ever he got into this sad work o' lawing, it's the same as if he'd made away with
the note himself; for he'd made up his mind to be that much poorer. But there's a deal o' things
to be considered, young man," Mr. Glegg added, looking admonishingly at Tom, "when you come
to money business, and you may be taking one man's dinner away to make another man's breakfast.
You don't understand that, I doubt?"

"Yes, I do," said Tom, decidedly. "I know if I owe money to one man, I've no right to give
it to another. But if my father had made up his mind to give my aunt the money before he was
in debt, he had a right to do it."

"Well done, young man! I didn't think you'd been so sharp," said uncle Glegg, with much candor.
"But perhaps your father did make away with the note. Let us go and see if we can find it in
the chest."

"It's in my father's room. Let us go too, aunt Gritty," whispered Maggie.

Chapter IV

A Vanishing Gleam

Mr. Tulliver, even between the fits of spasmodic rigidity which had recurred at intervals ever
since he had been found fallen from his horse, was usually in so apathetic a condition that
the exits and entrances into his room were not felt to be of great importance. He had lain
so still, with his eyes closed, all this morning, that Maggie told her aunt Moss she must not
expect her father to take any notice of them.

They entered very quietly, and Mrs. Moss took her seat near the head of the bed, while Maggie
sat in her old place on the bed, and put her hand on her father's without causing any change
in his face.

Mr. Glegg and Tom had also entered, treading softly, and were busy selecting the key of the
old oak chest from the bunch which Tom had brought from his father's bureau. They succeeded
in opening the chest,--which stood opposite the foot of Mr. Tulliver's bed,--and propping the
lid with the iron holder, without much noise.

"There's a tin box," whispered Mr. Glegg; "he'd most like put a small thing like a note in
there. Lift it out, Tom; but I'll just lift up these deeds,--they're the deeds o' the house
and mill, I suppose,--and see what there is under 'em."

Mr. Glegg had lifted out the parchments, and had fortunately drawn back a little, when the
iron holder gave way, and the heavy lid fell with a loud bang that resounded over the house.

Perhaps there was something in that sound more than the mere fact of the strong vibration that
produced the instantaneous effect on the frame of the prostrate man, and for the time completely
shook off the obstruction of paralysis. The chest had belonged to his father and his father's
father, and it had always been rather a solemn business to visit it. All long-known objects,
even a mere window fastening or a particular door-latch, have sounds which are a sort of recognized
voice to us,--a voice that will thrill and awaken, when it has been used to touch deep-lying
fibres. In the same moment, when all the eyes in the room were turned upon him, he started
up and looked at the chest, the parchments in Mr. Glegg's hand, and Tom holding the tin box,
with a glance of perfect consciousness and recognition.

"What are you going to do with those deeds?" he said, in his ordinary tone of sharp questioning
whenever he was irritated. "Come here, Tom. What do you do, going to my chest?"

Tom obeyed, with some trembling; it was the first time his father had recognized him. But instead
of saying anything more to him, his father continued to look with a growing distinctness of
suspicion at Mr. Glegg and the deeds.

"What's been happening, then?" he said sharply. "What are you meddling with my deeds for? Is
Wakem laying hold of everything? Why don't you tell me what you've been a-doing?" he added
impatiently, as Mr. Glegg advanced to the foot of the bed before speaking.

"No, no, friend Tulliver," said Mr. Glegg, in a soothing tone. "Nobody's getting hold of anything
as yet. We only came to look and see what was in the chest. You've been ill, you know, and
we've had to look after things a bit. But let's hope you'll soon be well enough to attend to
everything yourself."

Mr. Tulliver looked around him meditatively, at Tom, at Mr. Glegg, and at Maggie; then suddenly
appearing aware that some one was seated by his side at the head of the bed he turned sharply
round and saw his sister.

"Eh, Gritty!" he said, in the half-sad, affectionate tone in which he had been wont to speak
to her. "What! you're there, are you? How could you manage to leave the children?"

"Oh, brother!" said good Mrs. Moss, too impulsive to be prudent, "I'm thankful I'm come now
to see you yourself again; I thought you'd never know us any more."

"What! have I had a stroke?" said Mr. Tulliver, anxiously, looking at Mr. Glegg.

"A fall from your horse--shook you a bit,--that's all, I think," said Mr. Glegg. "But you'll
soon get over it, let's hope."

Mr. Tulliver fixed his eyes on the bed-clothes, and remained silent for two or three minutes.
A new shadow came over his face. He looked up at Maggie first, and said in a lower tone, "You
got the letter, then, my wench?"

"Yes, father," she said, kissing him with a full heart. She felt as if her father were come
back to her from the dead, and her yearning to show him how she had always loved him could
be fulfilled.

"Where's your mother?" he said, so preoccupied that he received the kiss as passively as some
quiet animal might have received it.

"She's downstairs with my aunts, father. Shall I fetch her?"

"Ay, ay; poor Bessy!" and his eyes turned toward Tom as Maggie left the room.

"You'll have to take care of 'em both if I die, you know, Tom. You'll be badly off, I doubt.
But you must see and pay everybody. And mind,--there's fifty pound o' Luke's as I put into
the business,--he gave me a bit at a time, and he's got nothing to show for it. You must pay
him first thing."

Uncle Glegg involuntarily shook his head, and looked more concerned than ever, but Tom said firmly:

"Yes, father. And haven't you a note from my uncle Moss for three hundred pounds? We came to
look for that. What do you wish to be done about it, father?"

"Ah! I'm glad you thought o' that, my lad," said Mr. Tulliver. "I allays meant to be easy about
that money, because o' your aunt. You mustn't mind losing the money, if they can't pay it,--and
it's like enough they can't. The note's in that box, mind! I allays meant to be good to you,
Gritty," said Mr. Tulliver, turning to his sister; "but you know you aggravated me when you
would have Moss."

At this moment Maggie re-entered with her mother, who came in much agitated by the news that
her husband was quite himself again.

"Well, Bessy," he said, as she kissed him, "you must forgive me if you're worse off than you
ever expected to be. But it's the fault o' the law,--it's none o' mine," he added angrily.
"It's the fault o' raskills. Tom, you mind this: if ever you've got the chance, you make Wakem
smart. If you don't, you're a good-for-nothing son. You might horse-whip him, but he'd set
the law on you,--the law's made to take care o' raskills."

Mr. Tulliver was getting excited, and an alarming flush was on his face. Mr. Glegg wanted to
say something soothing, but he was prevented by Mr. Tulliver's speaking again to his wife.
"They'll make a shift to pay everything, Bessy," he said, "and yet leave you your furniture;
and your sisters'll do something for you--and Tom'll grow up--though what he's to be I don't
know--I've done what I could--I've given him a eddication--and there's the little wench, she'll
get married--but it's a poor tale----"

The sanative effect of the strong vibration was exhausted, and with the last words the poor
man fell again, rigid and insensible. Though this was only a recurrence of what had happened
before, it struck all present as if it had been death, not only from its contrast with the
completeness of the revival, but because his words had all had reference to the possibility
that his death was near. But with poor Tulliver death was not to be a leap; it was to be a
long descent under thickening shadows.

Mr. Turnbull was sent for; but when he heard what had passed, he said this complete restoration,
though only temporary, was a hopeful sign, proving that there was no permanent lesion to prevent
ultimate recovery.

Among the threads of the past which the stricken man had gathered up, he had omitted the bill
of sale; the flash of memory had only lit up prominent ideas, and he sank into forgetfulness
again with half his humiliation unlearned.

But Tom was clear upon two points,--that his uncle Moss's note must be destroyed; and that
Luke's money must be paid, if in no other way, out of his own and Maggie's money now in the
savings bank. There were subjects, you perceive, on which Tom was much quicker than on the
niceties of classical construction, or the relations of a mathematical demonstration.

Chapter V

Tom Applies His Knife to the Oyster

The next day, at ten o'clock, Tom was on his way to St. Ogg's, to see his uncle Deane, who
was to come home last night, his aunt had said; and Tom had made up his mind that his uncle
Deane was the right person to ask for advice about getting some employment. He was in a great
way of business; he had not the narrow notions of uncle Glegg; and he had risen in the world
on a scale of advancement which accorded with Tom's ambition.

It was a dark, chill, misty morning, likely to end in rain,--one of those mornings when even
happy people take refuge in their hopes. And Tom was very unhappy; he felt the humiliation
as well as the prospective hardships of his lot with all the keenness of a proud nature; and
with all his resolute dutifulness toward his father there mingled an irrepressible indignation
against him which gave misfortune the less endurable aspect of a wrong. Since these were the
consequences of going to law, his father was really blamable, as his aunts and uncles had always
said he was; and it was a significant indication of Tom's character, that though he thought
his aunts ought to do something more for his mother, he felt nothing like Maggie's violent
resentment against them for showing no eager tenderness and generosity. There were no impulses
in Tom that led him to expect what did not present itself to him as a right to be demanded.
Why should people give away their money plentifully to those who had not taken care of their
own money? Tom saw some justice in severity; and all the more, because he had confidence in
himself that he should never deserve that just severity. It was very hard upon him that he
should be put at this disadvantage in life by his father's want of prudence; but he was not
going to complain and to find fault with people because they did not make everything easy for
him. He would ask no one to help him, more than to give him work and pay him for it. Poor Tom
was not without his hopes to take refuge in under the chill damp imprisonment of the December
fog, which seemed only like a part of his home troubles. At sixteen, the mind that has the
strongest affinity for fact cannot escape illusion and self-flattery; and Tom, in sketching
his future, had no other guide in arranging his facts than the suggestions of his own brave
self-reliance. Both Mr. Glegg and Mr. Deane, he knew, had been very poor once; he did not want
to save money slowly and retire on a moderate fortune like his uncle Glegg, but he would be
like his uncle Deane--get a situation in some great house of business and rise fast. He had
scarcely seen anything of his uncle Deane for the last three years--the two families had been
getting wider apart; but for this very reason Tom was the more hopeful about applying to him.
His uncle Glegg, he felt sure, would never encourage any spirited project, but he had a vague
imposing idea of the resources at his uncle Deane's command. He had heard his father say, long
ago, how Deane had made himself so valuable to Guest & Co. that they were glad enough to offer
him a share in the business; that was what Tom resolved he would do. It was intolerable to
think of being poor and looked down upon all one's life. He would provide for his mother and
sister, and make every one say that he was a man of high character. He leaped over the years
in this way, and, in the haste of strong purpose and strong desire, did not see how they would
be made up of slow days, hours, and minutes.

By the time he had crossed the stone bridge over the Floss and was entering St. Ogg's, he was
thinking that he would buy his father's mill and land again when he was rich enough, and improve
the house and live there; he should prefer it to any smarter, newer place, and he could keep
as many horses and dogs as he liked.

Walking along the street with a firm, rapid step, at this point in his reverie he was startled
by some one who had crossed without his notice, and who said to him in a rough, familiar voice:

"Why, Master Tom, how's your father this morning?" It was a publican of St. Ogg's, one of his
father's customers.

Tom disliked being spoken to just then; but he said civilly, "He's still very ill, thank you."

"Ay, it's been a sore chance for you, young man, hasn't it,--this lawsuit turning out against
him?" said the publican, with a confused, beery idea of being good-natured.

Tom reddened and passed on; he would have felt it like the handling of a bruise, even if there
had been the most polite and delicate reference to his position.

"That's Tulliver's son," said the publican to a grocer standing on the adjacent door-step.

"Ah!" said the grocer, "I thought I knew his features. He takes after his mother's family;
she was a Dodson. He's a fine, straight youth; what's he been brought up to?"

"Oh! to turn up his nose at his father's customers, and be a fine gentleman,--not much else,
I think."

Tom, roused from his dream of the future to a thorough consciousness of the present, made all
the greater haste to reach the warehouse offices of Guest & Co., where he expected to find
his uncle Deane. But this was Mr. Deane's morning at the band, a clerk told him, and with some
contempt for his ignorance; Mr. Deane was not to be found in River Street on a Thursday morning.

At the bank Tom was admitted into the private room where his uncle was, immediately after sending
in his name. Mr. Deane was auditing accounts; but he looked up as Tom entered, and putting
out his hand, said, "Well, Tom, nothing fresh the matter at home, I hope? How's your father?"

"Much the same, thank you, uncle," said Tom, feeling nervous. "But I want to speak to you,
please, when you're at liberty."

"Sit down, sit down," said Mr. Deane, relapsing into his accounts, in which he and the managing-clerk
remained so absorbed for the next half-hour that Tom began to wonder whether he should have
to sit in this way till the bank closed,--there seemed so little tendency toward a conclusion
in the quiet, monotonous procedure of these sleek, prosperous men of business. Would his uncle
give him a place in the bank? It would be very dull, prosy work, he thought, writing there
forever to the loud ticking of a timepiece. He preferred some other way of getting rich. But
at last there was a change; his uncle took a pen and wrote something with a flourish at the end.

"You'll just step up to Torry's now, Mr. Spence, will you?" said Mr. Deane, and the clock suddenly
became less loud and deliberate in Tom's ears.

"Well, Tom," said Mr. Deane, when they were alone, turning his substantial person a little
in his chair, and taking out his snuff-box; "what's the business, my boy; what's the business?"
Mr. Deane, who had heard from his wife what had passed the day before, thought Tom was come
to appeal to him for some means of averting the sale.

"I hope you'll excuse me for troubling you, uncle," said Tom, coloring, but speaking in a tone
which, though, tremulous, had a certain proud independence in it; "but I thought you were the
best person to advise me what to do."

"Ah!" said Mr. Deane, reserving his pinch of snuff, and looking at Tom with new attention,
"let us hear."

"I want to get a situation, uncle, so that I may earn some money," said Tom, who never fell
into circumlocution.

"A situation?" said Mr. Deane, and then took his pinch of snuff with elaborate justice to each
nostril. Tom thought snuff-taking a most provoking habit.

"Why, let me see, how old are you?" said Mr. Deane, as he threw himself backward again.

"Sixteen; I mean, I am going in seventeen," said Tom, hoping his uncle noticed how much beard
he had.

"Let me see; your father had some notion of making you an engineer, I think?"

"But I don't think I could get any money at that for a long while, could I?"

"That's true; but people don't get much money at anything, my boy, when they're only sixteen.
You've had a good deal of schooling, however; I suppose you're pretty well up in accounts,
eh? You understand book keeping?"

"No," said Tom, rather falteringly. "I was in Practice. But Mr. Stelling says I write a good
hand, uncle. That's my writing," added Tom, laying on the table a copy of the list he had made
yesterday.

"Ah! that's good, that's good. But, you see, the best hand in the world'll not get you a better
place than a copying-clerk's, if you know nothing of book-keeping,--nothing of accounts. And
a copying-clerk's a cheap article. But what have you been learning at school, then?"

Mr. Deane had not occupied himself with methods of education, and had no precise conception
of what went forward in expensive schools.

"We learned Latin," said Tom, pausing a little between each item, as if he were turning over
the books in his school-desk to assist his memory,--"a good deal of Latin; and the last year
I did Themes, one week in Latin and one in English; and Greek and Roman history; and Euclid;
and I began Algebra, but I left it off again; and we had one day every week for Arithmetic.
Then I used to have drawing-lessons; and there were several other books we either read or learned
out of,--English Poetry, and Horæ Pauliné and Blair's Rhetoric, the last half."

Mr. Deane tapped his snuff-box again and screwed up his mouth; he felt in the position of many
estimable persons when they had read the New Tariff, and found how many commodities were imported
of which they knew nothing; like a cautious man of business, he was not going to speak rashly
of a raw material in which he had had no experience. But the presumption was, that if it had
been good for anything, so successful a man as himself would hardly have been ignorant of it.

About Latin he had an opinion, and thought that in case of another war, since people would
no longer wear hair-powder, it would be well to put a tax upon Latin, as a luxury much run
upon by the higher classes, and not telling at all on the ship-owning department. But, for
what he knew, the Horé Pauliné might be something less neutral. On the whole, this list of
acquirements gave him a sort of repulsion toward poor Tom.

"Well," he said at last, in rather a cold, sardonic tone, "you've had three years at these
things,--you must be pretty strong in 'em. Hadn't you better take up some line where they'll
come in handy?"

Tom colored, and burst out, with new energy:

"I'd rather not have any employment of that sort, uncle. I don't like Latin and those things.
I don't know what I could do with them unless I went as usher in a school; and I don't know
them well enough for that! besides, I would as soon carry a pair of panniers. I don't want
to be that sort of person. I should like to enter into some business where I can get on,--a
manly business, where I should have to look after things, and get credit for what I did. And
I shall want to keep my mother and sister."

"Ah, young gentleman," said Mr. Deane, with that tendency to repress youthful hopes which stout
and successful men of fifty find one of their easiest duties, "that's sooner said than done,--sooner
said than done."

"But didn't you get on in that way, uncle?" said Tom, a little irritated that Mr. Deane did
not enter more rapidly into his views. "I mean, didn't you rise from one place to another through
your abilities and good conduct?"

"Ay, ay, sir," said Mr. Deane, spreading himself in his chair a little, and entering with great
readiness into a retrospect of his own career. "But I'll tell you how I got on. It wasn't by
getting astride a stick and thinking it would turn into a horse if I sat on it long enough.
I kept my eyes and ears open, sir, and I wasn't too fond of my own back, and I made my master's
interest my own. Why, with only looking into what went on in the mill,, I found out how there
was a waste of five hundred a-year that might be hindered. Why, sir, I hadn't more schooling
to begin with than a charity boy; but I saw pretty soon that I couldn't get on far enough without
mastering accounts, and I learned 'em between working hours, after I'd been unlading. Look
here." Mr. Deane opened a book and pointed to the page. "I write a good hand enough, and I'll
match anybody at all sorts of reckoning by the head; and I got it all by hard work, and paid
for it out of my own earnings,--often out of my own dinner and supper. And I looked into the
nature of all the things we had to do in the business, and picked up knowledge as I went about
my work, and turned it over in my head. Why, I'm no mechanic,--I never pretended to be--but
I've thought of a thing or two that the mechanics never thought of, and it's made a fine difference
in our returns. And there isn't an article shipped or unshipped at our wharf but I know the
quality of it. If I got places, sir, it was because I made myself fit for 'em. If you want
to slip into a round hole, you must make a ball of yourself; that's where it is."

Mr. Deane tapped his box again. He had been led on by pure enthusiasm in his subject, and had
really forgotten what bearing this retrospective survey had on his listener. He had found occasion
for saying the same thing more than once before, and was not distinctly aware that he had not
his port-wine before him.

"Well, uncle," said Tom, with a slight complaint in his tone, "that's what I should like to
do. Can't I get on in the same way?"

"In the same way?" said Mr. Deane, eyeing Tom with quiet deliberation. "There go two or three
questions to that, Master Tom. That depends on what sort of material you are, to begin with,
and whether you've been put into the right mill. But I'll tell you what it is. Your poor father
went the wrong way to work in giving you an education. It wasn't my business, and I didn't
interfere; but it is as I thought it would be. You've had a sort of learning that's all very
well for a young fellow like our Mr. Stephen Guest, who'll have nothing to do but sign checks
all his life, and may as well have Latin inside his head as any other sort of stuffing."

"But, uncle," said Tom, earnestly, "I don't see why the Latin need hinder me from getting on
in business. I shall soon forget it all; it makes no difference to me. I had to do my lessons
at school, but I always thought they'd never be of any use to me afterward; I didn't care about
them."

"Ay, ay, that's all very well," said Mr. Deane; "but it doesn't alter what I was going to say.
Your Latin and rigmarole may soon dry off you, but you'll be but a bare stick after that. Besides,
it's whitened your hands and taken the rough work out of you. And what do you know? Why, you
know nothing about book-keeping, to begin with, and not so much of reckoning as a common shopman.
You'll have to begin at a low round of the ladder, let me tell you, if you mean to get on in
life. It's no use forgetting the education your father's been paying for, if you don't give
yourself a new un."

Tom bit his lips hard; he felt as if the tears were rising, and he would rather die than let them.

"You want me to help you to a situation," Mr. Deane went on; "well, I've no fault to find with
that. I'm willing to do something for you. But you youngsters nowadays think you're to begin
with living well and working easy; you've no notion of running afoot before you get horseback.
Now, you must remember what you are,--you're a lad of sixteen, trained to nothing particular.
There's heaps of your sort, like so many pebbles, made to fit in nowhere. Well, you might be
apprenticed to some business,--a chemist's and druggist's perhaps; your Latin might come in
a bit there----"

Tom was going to speak, but Mr. Deane put up his hand and said:

"Stop! hear what I've got to say. You don't want to be a 'prentice,--I know, I know,--you want
to make more haste, and you don't want to stand behind a counter. But if you're a copying-clerk,
you'll have to stand behind a desk, and stare at your ink and paper all day; there isn't much
out-look there, and you won't be much wiser at the end of the year than at the beginning. The
world isn't made of pen, ink, and paper, and if you're to get on in the world, young man, you
must know what the world's made of. Now the best chance for you 'ud be to have a place on a
wharf, or in a warehouse, where you'd learn the smell of things, but you wouldn't like that,
I'll be bound; you'd have to stand cold and wet, and be shouldered about by rough fellows.
You're too fine a gentleman for that."

Mr. Deane paused and looked hard at Tom, who certainly felt some inward struggle before he
could reply.

"I would rather do what will be best for me in the end, sir; I would put up with what was disagreeable."

"That's well, if you can carry it out. But you must remember it isn't only laying hold of a
rope, you must go on pulling. It's the mistake you lads make that have got nothing either in
your brains or your pocket, to think you've got a better start in the world if you stick yourselves
in a place where you can keep your coats clean, and have the shopwenches take you for fine
gentlemen. That wasn't the way I started, young man; when I was sixteen, my jacket smelt of
tar, and I wasn't afraid of handling cheeses. That's the reason I can wear good broadcloth
now, and have my legs under the same table with the head of the best firms in St. Ogg's."

Uncle Deane tapped his box, and seemed to expand a little under his waistcoat and gold chain,
as he squared his shoulders in the chair.

"Is there any place at liberty that you know of now, uncle, that I should do for? I should
like to set to work at once," said Tom, with a slight tremor in his voice.

"Stop a bit, stop a bit; we mustn't be in too great a hurry. You must bear in mind, if I put
you in a place you're a bit young for, because you happen to be my nephew, I shall be responsible
for you. And there's no better reason, you know, than your being my nephew; because it remains
to be seen whether you're good for anything."

"I hope I shall never do you any discredit, uncle," said Tom, hurt, as all boys are at the
statement of the unpleasant truth that people feel no ground for trusting them. "I care about
my own credit too much for that."

"Well done, Tom, well done! That's the right spirit, and I never refuse to help anybody if
they've a mind to do themselves justice. There's a young man of two-and-twenty I've got my
eye on now. I shall do what I can for that young man; he's got some pith in him. But then,
you see, he's made good use of his time,--a first-rate calculator,-- can tell you the cubic
contents of anything in no time, and put me up the other day to a new market for Swedish bark;
he's uncommonly knowing in manufactures, that young fellow."

"I'd better set about learning book-keeping, hadn't I, uncle?" said Tom, anxious to prove his
readiness to exert himself.

"Yes, yes, you can't do amiss there. But--Ah, Spence, you're back again. Well Tom, there's
nothing more to be said just now, I think, and I must go to business again. Good-by. Remember
me to your mother."

Mr. Deane put out his hand, with an air of friendly dismissal, and Tom had not courage to ask
another question, especially in the presence of Mr. Spence. So he went out again into the cold
damp air. He had to call at his uncle Glegg's about the money in the Savings Bank, and by the
time he set out again the mist had thickened, and he could not see very far before him; but
going along River Street again, he was startled, when he was within two yards of the projecting
side of a shop-window, by the words "Dorlcote Mill" in large letters on a hand-bill, placed
as if on purpose to stare at him. It was the catalogue of the sale to take place the next week;
it was a reason for hurrying faster out of the town.

Poor Tom formed no visions of the distant future as he made his way homeward; he only felt
that the present was very hard. Sometimes it comes from bad shoeing. Some people like it. I don't myself."
After a while he added, "If you can get this mare for a hundred and twenty-five, you'd better buy
her."

"Well, I will," said my friend. He would have bought her, in fact, if she had clicked like a
noiseless sewing-machine. But the owner, remote as Medford, and invisibly dealing, as usual, through
a third person, would not sell her for one and a quarter; he wanted one and a half. Besides, another
Party was trying to get her; and now ensued a negotiation which for intricacy and mystery surpassed
all the others. It was conducted in my friend's interest by one who had the difficult task of keeping
the owner's imagination in check and his demands within bounds, for it soon appeared that he
wanted even more than one and a half for her. Unseen and inaccessible,
he grew every day more unmanageable.

He entered into relations with the other Party, and it all ended in his sending her out one
day after my friend had gone into the country, and requiring him to say at once that he would
give one and a half. He was not at home, and he never saw the little mare again. This confirmed
him in the belief that she was the very horse he ought to have had.

People had now begun to say to him, "Why don't you advertise? Advertise for a gentleman's pony-horse
and phaeton and harness complete. You'll have a perfect procession
of them before night."

This proved true. His advertisement, mystically worded after the fashion of those things, found
abundant response.

But the establishments which he would have taken he could not get
at the figure he had set, and those which his money would buy he would
not have.

They came at all hours of the day; and he never returned home after an an absence without meeting
the reproach that now the very horse he wanted had just been driven away, and would not be brought
back, as his owner lived in Billerica, and only happened to be down. A few equipages really
appeared desirable, but in regard to these his jaded faculties refused to work: he could decide
nothing; his volition was extinct; he let them come and go.

It was at this period that people who had at first been surprised that he wished to buy a horse
came to believe that he had bought one, and were astonished to learn
that he had not.

He felt the pressure of public opinion.

He began to haunt the different sale-stables in town, and to look at horses with a view to buying
at private sale. Every facility for testing them was offered him, but he could not make up his
mind. In feeble wantonness he gave appointments which he knew he should not keep, and, passing
his days in an agony of multitudinous indecision, he added to the lies in the world the hideous
sum of his broken engagements. From time to time he forlornly appeared at the Chevaliers',
and refreshed his corrupted nature by contact with their sterling
integrity.

Once he ventured into their establishment just before an auction began, and remained dazzled
by the splendor of a spectacle which I fancy can be paralleled only by some dream of a mediæval
tournament. The horses, brilliantly harnessed, accurately shod, and standing tall on burnished hooves,
their necks curved by the check rein and their black and blonde manes flowing over the proud
arch, lustrous and wrinkled like satin, were ranged in a glittering hemicycle. They affected
my friend like the youth and beauty of his earliest evening parties;
he experienced a sense of bashfulness, of sickening personal demerit.

He could not have had the audacity to bid on one of those superb creatures, if all the Chevaliers
together had whispered him that here at last was the very horse.

I pass over an unprofitable interval in which he abandoned himself
to despair, and really gave up the hope of being able ever to buy
a horse.

During this interval he removed from Charlesbridge to the country, and found himself, to his
self-scorn and self-pity, actually reduced to hiring a livery horse
by the day.

But relief was at hand. The carpenter who had remained to finish up the new house after my friend
had gone into it bethought himself of a firm in his place who brought on horses from the West,
and had the practice of selling a horse on trial, and constantly replacing it with other horses
till the purchaser was suited. This seemed an ideal arrangement, and the carpenter said that he
thought they had the very horse my friend wanted.

The next day he drove him up, and upon the plan of successive exchanges till the perfect horse was
reached, my friend bought him for one and a quarter, the figure which he had kept in mind from
the first. He bought a phaeton and harness from the same people, and when the whole equipage
stood at his door, he felt the long-delayed thrill of pride and satisfaction. The horse was
of the Morgan breed, a bright bay, small and round and neat, with a little head tossed high,
and a gentle yet alert movement. He was in the prime of youth, of the age of which every horse
desires to be, and was just coming seven.

My friend had already taken him to a horse-doctor, who for one dollar had gone all over him,
and pronounced him sound as a fish, and complimented his new owner upon his acquisition. It
all seemed too good to be true. As Billy turned his soft eye on the admiring family group,
and suffered one of the children to smooth his nose while another held a lump of sugar to his
dainty lips, his amiable behavior restored my friend to his peace of mind and his long-lost
faith in a world of reason.

The ridiculous planet, wavering bat-like through space, on which it had been impossible for an innocent
man to buy a suitable horse was a dream of the past, and he had the
solid, sensible old earth under his feet once more.

He mounted into the phaeton and drove off with his wife; he returned
and gave each of the children a drive in succession.

He told them that any of them could drive Billy as much as they liked,
and he quieted a clamor for exclusive ownership on the part of each
by declaring that Billy belonged to the whole family.

To this day he cannot look back to those moments without tenderness. If Billy had any apparent
fault, it was an amiable indolence. But this made him all the safer for the children, and it did
not really amount to laziness. While on sale he had been driven in a provision cart, and had
therefore the habit of standing unhitched. One had merely to fling the reins into the bottom
of the phaeton and leave Billy to his own custody. His other habit of drawing up at kitchen
gates was not confirmed, and the fact that he stumbled on his way to the doctor who pronounced
him blameless was reasonably attributed to a loose stone at the foot of the hill; the misstep
resulted in a barked shin, but a little wheel-grease, in a horse of Billy's complexion, easily
removed the evidence of this.

It was natural that after Billy was bought and paid for, several extremely
desirable horses should be offered to my friend by their owners, who
came in person, stripped of all the adventitious mystery of agents
and middle-men.

They were gentlemen, and they spoke the English habitual with persons not corrupted by horses.
My friend saw them come and go with grief; for he did not like to be shaken in his belief that Billy
was the only horse in the world for him, and he would have liked to purchase their animals,
if only to show his appreciation of honor and frankness and sane language. Yet he was consoled
by the possession of Billy, whom he found increasingly excellent and trustworthy. Any of the
family drove him about; he stood unhitched; he was not afraid of cars; he was as kind as a kitten;
he had not, as the neighboring coachman said, a voice, though he seemed a little loively in coming
out of the stable sometimes. He went well under the saddle; he was a beauty, and if he had a voice,
it was too great satisfaction in his personal appearance.

One evening after tea, the young gentleman, who was about to drive Billy out, stung by the reflection
that he had not taken blackberries and cream twice, ran into the house to repair the omission,
and left Billy, as usual, unhitched at the door. During his absence, Billy caught sight of his
stable, and involuntarily moved towards it. Finding himself unchecked, he gently increased his pace;
and when my friend, looking up from the melon-patch which he was admiring, called out, "Ho, Billy!
Whoa, Billy!" and headed him off from the gap, Billy profited by the circumstance to turn into
the pear orchard. The elastic turf under his unguided hoof seemed to exhilarate him; his pace became
a trot, a canter, a gallop, a tornado; the reins fluttered like ribbons in the air; the phaeton
flew ruining after. In a terrible cyclone the equipage swept round the neighbor's house, vanished,
reappeared, swooped down his lawn, and vanished again.

It was incredible.

My friend stood transfixed among his melons. He knew that his neighbor's children played under
the porte-cochère on the other side of the house which Billy had just surrounded in his flight,
and probably.... My friend's first impulse was not to go and see, but to walk into his own house,
and ignore the whole affair. But you cannot really ignore an affair of that kind. You must face
it, and commonly it stares you out of countenance. Commonly, too, it knows how to choose its
time so as to disgrace as well as crush its victim.

His neighbor had people to tea, and long before my friend reached the house the host and his
guests were all out on the lawn, having taken the precaution to bring their napkins with them.

"The children!" gasped my friend.

"Oh, they were all in bed," said the neighbor, and he began to laugh. That was right; my friend would
have mocked at the calamity if it had been his neighbor's. "Let us go and look up your phaeton."
He put his hand on the naked flank of a fine young elm, from which
the bark had just been stripped.

"Billy seems to have passed this way."

At the foot of a stone-wall four feet high lay the phaeton, with three wheels in the air, and
the fourth crushed flat against the axle; the willow back was broken, the shafts were pulled
out, and Billy was gone.

"Good thing there was nobody in it," said the neighbor.

"Good thing it didn't run down some Irish family, and get you in for damages," said a guest.

It
appeared, then, that there were two good things about this disaster. My friend had not thought
there were so many, but while he rejoiced in this fact, he rebelled
at the notion that a sorrow like that rendered the sufferer in any
event liable for damages, and he resolved that he never would have
paid them.

But probably he would.

Some half-grown boys got the phaeton right-side up, and restored its shafts and cushions, and it
limped away with them towards the carriage-house. Presently another half-grown boy came riding
Billy up the hill. Billy showed an inflated nostril and an excited eye, but physically he
was unharmed, save for a slight scratch on what was described as the off hind-leg; the reader
may choose which leg this was.

"The worst of it is," said the guest, "that you never can trust 'em after they've run off once."

"Have some tea?" said the host to my friend.

"No, thank you," said my friend, in whose heart the worst of it rankled; and he walked home
embittered by his guilty consciousness that Billy ought never to
have been left untied.

But it was not this self-reproach; it was not the mutilated phaeton; it was not the loss of
Billy, who must now be sold; it was the wreck of settled hopes, the renewed suspense of faith,
the repetition of the tragical farce of buying another horse, that most grieved my friend.

Billy's
former owners made a feint of supplying other horses in his place, but the only horse supplied
was an aged veteran with the scratches, who must have come seven early in our era, and who,
from his habit of getting about on tiptoe, must have been tender for'a'd beyond anything of
my friend's previous experience. Probably if he could have waited they might have replaced Billy
in time, but their next installment from the West produced nothing suited to his wants but
a horse with the presence and carriage of a pig, and he preferred to let them sell Billy for what
he would bring, and to trust his fate elsewhere. Billy had fallen nearly one half in value, and
he brought very little--to his owner; though the new purchaser was afterwards reported to value
him at much more than what my friend had paid for him. These things are really mysteries;
you cannot fathom them; it is idle to try. My friend remained grieving over his own folly and
carelessness, with a fond hankering for the poor little horse he had lost, and the belief
that he should never find such another.

Yet he was not without a philanthropist's consolation. He had added to the stock of harmless
pleasures in a degree of which he could not have dreamed. All his acquaintance knew that he had
bought a horse, and they all seemed now to conspire in asking him how he got on with it. He
was forced to confess the truth. On hearing it, his friends burst into shouts of laughter, and smote
their persons, and stayed themselves against lamp-posts and house-walls. They begged his pardon,
and then they began again, and shouted and roared anew.

Since the gale which blew down the poet ----'s chimneys and put him to the expense of rebuilding
them, no joke so generally satisfactory had been offered to the community.

My friend had, in his time, achieved the reputation of a wit by going about and and saying,
"Did you know ----'s chimneys had blown down?" and he had now himself
the pleasure of causing the like quality of wit in others.

Having abandoned the hope of getting anything out of the people who had sold him Billy, he was
for a time the prey of an inert despair, in which he had not even spirit to repine at the
disorder of a universe in which he could not find a horse. No horses were now offered to him,
for it had become known throughout the trade that he had bought a
horse.

He had therefore to set about counteracting this impression with what feeble powers were left
him. Of the facts of that period he remembers with confusion and remorse the trouble to which
he put the owner of the pony-horse Pansy, whom he visited repeatedly
in a neighboring town, at a loss of time and money to himself, and
with no result but to embarrass Pansy's owner in his relations with
people who had hired him and did not wish him sold.

Something of the old baffling mystery hung over Pansy's whereabouts; he was with difficulty produced,
and when en evidence he was not the Pansy my friend had expected.

He paltered with his regrets; he covered his disappointment with what pretenses he could;
and he waited till he could telegraph back his adverse decision. His conclusion was that, next
to proposing marriage, there was no transaction of life that involved so many delicate and complex
relations as buying a horse, and that the rupture of a horse-trade was little less embarrassing
and distressing to all concerned than a broken engagement. There was a terrible intimacy in
the affair; it was alarmingly personal. He went about sorrowing for the pain and disappointment
he had inflicted on many amiable people of all degrees who had tried to supply him with a
horse.

"Look here," said his neighbor, finding him in this low state, "why don't you get a horse of
the gentleman who furnishes mine?" This had been suggested before, and my friend explained
that he had disliked to make trouble. His scruples were lightly set aside, and he suffered himself
to be entreated. The fact was he was so discouraged with his attempt to buy a horse that if
any one had now given him such a horse as he wanted he would have taken it.

One sunny, breezy morning his neighbor drove my friend over to the beautiful farm of the good
genius on whose kindly offices he had now fixed his languid hopes. I need not say what the
landscape was in mid-August, or how, as they drew near the farm,
the air was enriched with the breath of vast orchards of early apples,--apples
that no forced fingers rude shatter from their stems, but that ripen
and mellow untouched, till they drop into the straw with which the
orchard aisles are bedded; it is the poetry of horticulture; it is
Art practicing the wise and gracious patience of Nature, and offering
to the Market a Summer Sweeting of the Hesperides.

The possessor of this luscious realm at once took my friend's case into consideration; he listened,
the owner of a hundred horses, with gentle indulgence to the shapeless desires of a man whose
wildest dream was one horse. At the end he said, "I see you want a horse that can take care
of himself."

"No," replied my friend, with the inspiration of despair. "I want
a horse that can take care of me."

The good genius laughed, and turned the conversation. Neither he nor my friend's neighbor was
a man of many words, and like taciturn people they talked in low tones. The three moved about
the room and looked at the Hispano-Roman pictures; they had a glass
of sherry; from time to time something was casually murmured about
Frank.

My friend felt that he was in good hands, and left the affair to them. It ended in a visit
to the stable, where it appeared that this gentleman had no horse to sell among his hundred
which exactly met my friend's want, but that he proposed to lend him Frank while a certain
other animal was put in training for the difficult office he required of a horse. One of the
men was sent for Frank, and in the mean time my friend was shown some gaunt and graceful thoroughbreds,
and taught to see the difference between them and the plebeian horse. But Frank, though no
thoroughbred, eclipsed these patricians when he came.

He had a little head, and a neck gallantly arched; he was black and plump and smooth, and though
he carried himself with a petted air, and was a dandy to the tips
of his hooves, his knowing eye was kindly.

He turned it upon my friend with the effect of understanding his case at a glance.

It was in this way that for the rest of the long, lovely summer peace was re-established in his
heart. There was no question of buying or selling Frank; there were associations that endeared
him beyond money to his owner; but my friend could take him without price. The situation had its
humiliation for a man who had been arrogantly trying to buy a horse,
but he submitted with grateful meekness, and with what grace Heaven
granted him; and Frank gayly entered upon the peculiar duties of his
position.

His first duty was to upset all preconceived notions of the advantage of youth in a horse. Frank
was not merely not coming seven or nine, but his age was an even number,--he was sixteen; and it was
his owner's theory, which Frank supported, that if a horse was well used he was a good horse
till twenty-five.

The truth is that Frank looked like a young horse; he was a dandy
without any of the ghastliness which attends the preservation of youth
in old beaux of another species.

When my friend drove him in the rehabilitated phaeton he felt that the turn-out was stylish,
and he learned to consult certain eccentricities of Frank's in the satisfaction of his pride.
One of these was a high reluctance to be passed on the road. Frank was as lazy a horse--but lazy
in a self-respectful, æsthetic way--as ever was; yet if he heard
a vehicle at no matter how great distance behind him (and he always
heard it before his driver), he brightened with resolution and defiance,
and struck out with speed that made competition difficult.

If my friend found that the horse behind was likely to pass Frank,
he made a merit of holding him in.

If they met a team, he lay back in his phaeton, and affected not to care to be going faster than
a walk, any way.

One of the things for which he chiefly prized Frank was his skill in backing and turning. He
is one of those men who become greatly perturbed when required to back and turn a vehicle;
he cannot tell (till too late) whether he ought to pull the right
rein in order to back to the left, or vice versa; he knows, indeed,
the principle, but he becomes paralyzed in its application.

Frank never was embarrassed, never confused. My friend had but to say, "Back, Frank!" and
Frank knew from the nature of the ground how far to back and which way to turn. He has thus
extricated my friend from positions in which it appeared to him that
no earthly power could relieve him.

In going up hill Frank knew just when to give himself a rest, and
at what moment to join the party in looking about and enjoying the
prospect.

He was also an adept in scratching off flies, and had a precision in reaching an insect anywhere
in his van with one of his rear hooves which few of us attain in slapping mosquitoes. This action
sometimes disquieted persons in the phaeton, but Frank knew perfectly
well what he was about, and if harm had happened to the people under
his charge my friend was sure that Frank could have done anything
short of applying arnica and telegraphing to their friends.

His varied knowledge of life and his long experience had satisfied
him that there were very few things to be afraid of in this world.

Such womanish weaknesses as shying and starting were far from him,
and he regarded the boisterous behavior of locomotives with indifference.

He had not, indeed, the virtue of one horse offered to my friend's purchase, of standing, unmoved,
with his nose against a passing express train; but he was certainly not afraid of the cars.

Frank
was by no means what Mr. Emerson calls a mush of concession; he was not merely amiable; he had
his moments of self-assertion, his touches of asperity. It was not safe to pat his nose, like
the erring Billy's; he was apt to bring his handsome teeth together
in proximity to the caressing hand with a sharp click and a sarcastic
grin. Not that he ever did, or ever would really bite. So, too, when
left to stand long under fly-haunted cover, he would start off afterwards
with alarming vehemence; and he objected to the saddle.

Time would have seemed to creep to the watchers by the bed, if it had only been measured by
the doubtful, distant hope which kept count of the moments within the chamber; but it was measured
for them by a fast-approaching dread which made the nights come too quickly. While Mr. Tulliver
was slowly becoming himself again, his lot was hastening toward its moment of most palpable
change. The taxing-masters had done their work like any respectable gunsmith conscientiously
preparing the musket, that, duly pointed by a brave arm, will spoil a life or two. Allocaturs,
filing of bills in Chancery, decrees of sale, are legal chain-shot or bomb-shells that can
never hit a solitary mark, but must fall with widespread shattering. So deeply inherent is
it in this life of ours that men have to suffer for each other's sins, so inevitably diffusive
is human suffering, that even justice makes its victims, and we can conceive no retribution
that does not spread beyond its mark in pulsations of unmerited pain.

By the beginning of the second week in January, the bills were out advertising the sale, under
a decree of Chancery, of Mr. Tulliver's farming and other stock, to be followed by a sale of
the mill and land, held in the proper after-dinner hour at the Golden Lion. The miller himself,
unaware of the lapse of time, fancied himself still in that first stage of his misfortunes
when expedients might be thought of; and often in his conscious hours talked in a feeble, disjointed
manner of plans he would carry out when he "got well." The wife and children were not without
hope of an issue that would at least save Mr. Tulliver from leaving the old spot, and seeking
an entirely strange life. For uncle Deane had been induced to interest himself in this stage
of the business. It would not, he acknowledged, be a bad speculation for Guest & Co. to buy
Dorlcote Mill, and carry on the business, which was a good one, and might be increased by the
addition of steam power; in which case Tulliver might be retained as manager. Still, Mr. Deane
would say nothing decided about the matter; the fact that Wakem held the mortgage on the land
might put it into his head to bid for the whole estate, and further, to outbid the cautious
firm of Guest &Co., who did not carry on business on sentimental grounds. Mr. Deane was obliged
to tell Mrs. Tulliver something to that effect, when he rode over to the mill to inspect the
books in company with Mrs. Glegg; for she had observed that "if Guest &Co. would only think
about it, Mr. Tulliver's father and grandfather had been carrying on Dorlcote Mill long before
the oil-mill of that firm had been so much as thought of."

Mr. Deane, in reply, doubted whether that was precisely the relation between the two mills
which would determine their value as investments. As for uncle Glegg, the thing lay quite beyond
his imagination; the good-natured man felt sincere pity for the Tulliver family, but his money
was all locked up in excellent mortgages, and he could run no risk; that would be unfair to
his own relatives; but he had made up his mind that Tulliver should have some new flannel waistcoats
which he had himself renounced in favor of a more elastic commodity, and that he would buy
Mrs. Tulliver a pound of tea now and then; it would be a journey which his benevolence delighted
in beforehand, to carry the tea and see her pleasure on being assured it was the best black.

Still, it was clear that Mr. Deane was kindly disposed toward the Tullivers. One day he had
brought Lucy, who was come home for the Christmas holidays, and the little blond angel-head
had pressed itself against Maggie's darker cheek with many kisses and some tears. These fair
slim daughters keep up a tender spot in the heart of many a respectable partner in a respectable
firm, and perhaps Lucy's anxious, pitying questions about her poor cousins helped to make uncle
Deane more prompt in finding Tom a temporary place in the warehouse, and in putting him in
the way of getting evening lessons in book-keeping and calculation.

That might have cheered the lad and fed his hopes a little, if there had not come at the same
time the much-dreaded blow of finding that his father must be a bankrupt, after all; at least,
the creditors must be asked to take less than their due, which to Tom's untechnical mind was
the same thing as bankruptcy. His father must not only be said to have "lost his property,"
but to have "failed,"--the word that carried the worst obloquy to Tom's mind. For when the
defendant's claim for costs had been satisfied, there would remain the friendly bill of Mr.
Gore, and the deficiency at the bank, as well as the other debts which would make the assets
shrink into unequivocal disproportion; "not more than ten or twelve shillings in the pound,"
predicted Mr. Deane, in a decided tone, tightening his lips; and the words fell on Tom like
a scalding liquied, leaving a continual smart.

He was sadly in want of something to keep up his spirits a little in the unpleasant newness
of his position,--suddenly transported from the easy carpeted ennui of study-hours at Mr. Stelling's,
and the busy idleness of castle-building in a "last half" at school, to the companionship of
sacks and hides, and bawling men thundering down heavy weights at his elbow. The first step
toward getting on in the world was a chill, dusty, noisy affair, and implied going without
one's tea in order to stay in St. Ogg's and have an evening lesson from a one-armed elderly
clerk, in a room smelling strongly of bad tobacco. Tom's young pink-and-white face had its
colors very much deadened by the time he took off his hat at home, and sat down with keen hunger
to his supper. No wonder he was a little cross if his mother or Maggie spoke to him.

But all this while Mrs. Tulliver was brooding over a scheme by which she, and no one else,
would avert the result most to be dreaded, and prevent Wakem from entertaining the purpose
of bidding for the mill. Imagine a truly respectable and amiable hen, by some portentous anomaly,
taking to reflection and inventing combinations by which she might prevail on Hodge not to
wring her neck, or send her and her chicks to market; the result could hardly be other than
much cackling and fluttering. Mrs. Tulliver, seeing that everything had gone wrong, had begun
to think she had been too passive in life; and that, if she had applied her mind to business,
and taken a strong resolution now and then, it would have been all the better for her and her
family. Nobody, it appeared, had thought of going to speak to Wakem on this business of the
mill; and yet, Mrs. Tulliver reflected, it would have been quite the shortest method of securing
the right end. It would have been of no use, to be sure, for Mr. Tulliver to go,--even if he
had been able and willing,--for he had been "going to law against Wakem" and abusing him for
the last ten years; Wakem was always likely to have a spite against him. And now that Mrs.
Tulliver had come to the conclusion that her husband was very much in the wrong to bring her
into this trouble, she was inclined to think that his opinion of Wakem was wrong too. To be
sure, Wakem had "put the bailies in the house, and sold them up"; but she supposed he did that
to please the man that lent Mr. Tulliver the money, for a lawyer had more folks to please than
one, and he wasn't likely to put Mr. Tulliver, who had gone to law with him, above everybody
else in the world. The attorney might be a very reasonable man; why not? He had married a Miss
Clint, and at the time Mrs. Tulliver had heard of that marriage, the summer when she wore her
blue satin spencer, and had not yet any thoughts of Mr. Tulliver, she knew no harm of Wakem.
And certainly toward herself, whom he knew to have been a Miss Dodson, it was out of all possibility
that he could entertain anything but good-will, when it was once brought home to his observation
that she, for her part, had never wanted to go to law, and indeed was at present disposed to
take Mr. Wakem's view of all subjects rather than her husband's. In fact, if that attorney
saw a respectable matron like herself disposed "to give him good words," why shouldn't he listen
to her representations? For she would put the matter clearly before him, which had never been
done yet. And he would never go and bid for the mill on purpose to spite her, an innocent woman,
who thought it likely enough that she had danced with him in their youth at Squire Darleigh's,
for at those big dances she had often and often danced with young men whose names she had forgotten. 

New York: Geo. P. Putnam.]

HOW THEY JESTED IN THE GOOD OLD TIME.

There is nothing which contributes so much to ease social intercourse as the jest. In comparison
with it, the proverb is only a humble subordinate, and song itself, with all its power, but
a weak influence. Yet the song and the proverb boast a critical literature, while the brief
compendiums of merriment which never die, which, once written, live through every age, and
force their way through every penetrable language, are undoubtedly less studied than any other
popular medium of feeling.

What is a jest? It is as little worth the while to try to define its nature, as it is to analyze
wit. We all know that the world laughs, and what it laughs at, and what the droll saws, anecdotes,
rhymes, quips, and facetiæ are, which give fame to a Bebel, or a Frischlin, a Tom Brown, and
a Joseph Miller. Leave labored analysis to the philosophers, contenting ourselves with remarking
that a jest is a laugh candied or frozen in words, and thawed and relished in the reading or
utterance. And laughter? When a man is too lazy to think out an idea,
and yet too active to dreamily feel it, he laughs.

When he catches its leading points, and yet realizes that behind them remains the incomprehensible
or incongruous, he settles it for the nonce with a smile. Hence it comes that we laugh so seldom
with all our heart, a second time over a jest. It has been comprehended; the mystery, the sense of contradiction
and incongruity, has vanished--we may revive it in others, and laugh electrically with them;
but the first piquant gusto of its spice is gone forever.

Yet the jest, like the proverb, acquires a value by becoming current. It often illustrates an opinion
or an experience, and when it is much worn, it may still gain a new
point, by being brought into illustrative relation with some event
or idea.

Esop's fables, or any fables, are, after all, only good jokes in a narrative form, which owe
their fame simply to their boundless capacity for application. Sidney Smith's story of Mrs. Partington,
who tried to mop out the Atlantic, was a jest, and so too was Lady Macbeth's 'cat i' the adage,' who
wanted fish, yet would not wet her paws, and let 'I dare not' wait
upon 'I would.' Something of our old enjoyment of a joke for the first
time, always lingers around it, and we gladly laugh again--for, 'old
love never quite rusts out.' And there are many jests, which, owing
to their boundless variety of application, always come before us in
a new light. It is still possible to believe that the attorney was not more guilty
toward him than an ingenious machine, which performs its work with much regularity, is guilty
toward the rash man who, venturing too near it, is caught up by some fly-wheel or other, and
suddenly converted into unexpected mince-meat.

But it is really impossible to decide this question by a glance at his person; the lines and
lights of the human countenance are like other symbols,--not always easy to read without a
key. On an a priori view of Wakem's aquiline nose, which offended Mr. Tulliver, there was not
more rascality than in the shape of his stiff shirt-collar, though this too along with his
nose, might have become fraught with damnatory meaning when once the rascality was ascertained.

"Mrs. Tulliver, I think?" said Mr. Wakem.

"Yes, sir; Miss Elizabeth Dodson as was."

"Pray be seated. You have some business with me?"

"Well, sir, yes," said Mrs. Tulliver, beginning to feel alarmed at her own courage, now she
was really in presence of the formidable man, and reflecting that she had not settled with
herself how she should begin. Mr. Wakem felt in his waistcoat pockets, and looked at her in
silence.

"I hope, sir," she began at last,--"I hope, sir, you're not a-thinking as I bear you any ill-will
because o' my husband's losing his lawsuit, and the bailies being put in, and the linen being
sold,--oh dear!--for I wasn't brought up in that way. I'm sure you remember my father, sir,
for he was close friends with Squire Darleigh, and we allays went to the dances there, the
Miss Dodsons,--nobody could be more looked on,--and justly, for there was four of us, and you're
quite aware as Mrs. Glegg and Mrs. Deane are my sisters. And as for going to law and losing
money, and having sales before you're dead, I never saw anything o' that before I was married,
nor for a long while after. And I'm not to be answerable for my bad luck i' marrying out o'
my own family into one where the goings-on was different. And as for being drawn in t' abuse
you as other folks abuse you, sir, that I niver was, and nobody can say it of me."

Mrs. Tulliver shook her head a little, and looked at the hem of her pocket-handkerchief.

"I've no doubt of what you say, Mrs. Tulliver," said Mr. Wakem, with cold politeness. "But
you have some question to ask me?"

"Well, sir, yes. But that's what I've said to myself,--I've said you'd had some nat'ral feeling;
and as for my husband, as hasn't been himself for this two months, I'm not a-defending him,
in no way, for being so hot about th' erigation,--not but what there's worse men, for he never
wronged nobody of a shilling nor a penny, not willingly; and as for his fieriness and lawing,
what could I do? And him struck as if it was with death when he got the letter as said you'd
the hold upo' the land. But I can't believe but what you'll behave as a gentleman."

"What does all this mean, Mrs. Tulliver?" said Mr. Wakem rather sharply. "What do you want
to ask me?"

"Why, sir, if you'll be so good," said Mrs. Tulliver, starting a little, and speaking more
hurriedly,--"if you'll be so good not to buy the mill an' the land,--the land wouldn't so much
matter, only my husband ull' be like mad at your having it."

Something like a new thought flashed across Mr. Wakem's face as he said, "Who told you I meant
to buy it?"

"Why, sir, it's none o' my inventing, and I should never ha' thought of it; for my husband,
as ought to know about the law, he allays used to say as lawyers had never no call to buy anything,--either
lands or houses,--for they allays got 'em into their hands other ways. An' I should think that
'ud be the way with you, sir; and I niver said as you'd be the man to do contrairy to that."

"Ah, well, who was it that did say so?" said Wakem, opening his desk, and moving things about,
with the accompaniment of an almost inaudible whistle.

"Why, sir, it was Mr. Glegg and Mr. Deane, as have all the management; and Mr. Deane thinks
as Guest &Co. 'ud buy the mill and let Mr. Tulliver work it for 'em, if you didn't bid for
it and raise the price. And it 'ud be such a thing for my husband to stay where he is, if he
could get his living: for it was his father's before him, the mill was, and his grandfather
built it, though I wasn't fond o' the noise of it, when first I was married, for there was
no mills in our family,--not the Dodson's,--and if I'd known as the mills had so much to do
with the law, it wouldn't have been me as 'ud have been the first Dodson to marry one; but
I went into it blindfold, that I did, erigation and everything."

"What! Guest &Co. would keep the mill in their own hands, I suppose, and pay your husband wages?"

"Oh dear, sir, it's hard to think of," said poor Mrs. Tulliver, a little tear making its way,
"as my husband should take wage. But it 'ud look more like what used to be, to stay at the
mill than to go anywhere else; and if you'll only think--if you was to bid for the mill and
buy it, my husband might be struck worse than he was before, and niver get better again as
he's getting now."

"Well, but if I bought the mill, and allowed your husband to act as my manager in the same
way, how then?" said Mr. Wakem.

"Oh, sir, I doubt he could niver be got to do it, not if the very mill stood still to beg and
pray of him. For your name's like poison to him, it's so as never was; and he looks upon it
as you've been the ruin of him all along, ever since you set the law on him about the road
through the meadow,--that's eight year ago, and he's been going on ever since--as I've allays
told him he was wrong----"

"He's a pig-headed, foul-mouthed fool!" burst out Mr. Wakem, forgetting himself.

"Oh dear, sir!" said Mrs. Tulliver, frightened at a result so different from the one she had
fixed her mind on; "I wouldn't wish to contradict you, but it's like enough he's changed his
mind with this illness,--he's forgot a many things he used to talk about. And you wouldn't
like to have a corpse on your mind, if he was to die; and they do say as it's allays unlucky
when Dorlcote Mill changes hands, and the water might all run away, and then--not as I'm wishing
you any ill-luck, sir, for I forgot to tell you as I remember your wedding as if it was yesterday;
Mrs. Wakem was a Miss Clint, I know that; and my boy, as there isn't a nicer, handsomer, straighter
boy nowhere, went to school with your son----"

Mr. Wakem rose, opened the door, and called to one of his clerks.

"You must excuse me for interrupting you, Mrs. Tulliver; I have business that must be attended
to; and I think there is nothing more necessary to be said."

"But if you would bear it in mind, sir," said Mrs. Tulliver, rising, "and not run against me
and my children; and I'm not denying Mr. Tulliver's been in the wrong, but he's been punished
enough, and there's worse men, for it's been giving to other folks has been his fault. He's
done nobody any harm but himself and his family,--the more's the pity,--and I go and look at
the bare shelves every day, and think where all my things used to stand."

"Yes, yes, I'll bear it in mind," said Mr. Wakem, hastily, looking toward the open door.

"And if you'd please not to say as I've been to speak to you, for my son 'ud be very angry
with me for demeaning myself, I know he would, and I've trouble enough without being scolded
by my children."

Poor Mrs. Tulliver's voice trembled a little, and she could make no answer to the attorney's
"good morning," but curtsied and walked out in silence.

"Which day is it that Dorlcote Mill is to be sold? Where's the bill?" said Mr. Wakem to his
clerk when they were alone.

"Next Friday is the day,--Friday at six o'clock."

"Oh, just run to Winship's the auctioneer, and see if he's at home. I have some business for
him; ask him to come up."

Although, when Mr. Wakem entered his office that morning, he had had no intention of purchasing
Dorlcote Mill, his mind was already made up. Mrs. Tulliver had suggested to him several determining
motives, and his mental glance was very rapid; he was one of those men who can be prompt without
being rash, because their motives run in fixed tracks, and they have no need to reconcile conflicting
aims.

To suppose that Wakem had the same sort of inveterate hatred toward Tulliver that Tulliver
had toward him would be like supposing that a pike and a roach can look at each other from
a similar point of view. The roach necessarily abhors the mode in which the pike gets his living,
and the pike is likely to think nothing further even of the most indignant roach than that
he is excellent good eating; it could only be when the roach choked him that the pike could
entertain a strong personal animosity. If Mr. Tulliver had ever seriously injured or thwarted
the attorney, Wakem would not have refused him the distinction of being a special object of
his vindictiveness. But when Mr. Tulliver called Wakem a rascal at the market dinner-table,
the attorneys' clients were not a whit inclined to withdraw their business from him; and if,
when Wakem himself happened to be present, some jocose cattle-feeder, stimulated by opportunity
and brandy, made a thrust at him by alluding to old ladies' wills, he maintained perfect sang
froid, and knew quite well that the majority of substantial men then present were perfectly
contented with the fact that "Wakem was Wakem"; that is to say, a man who always knew the stepping-stones
that would carry him through very muddy bits of practice. A man who had made a large fortune,
had a handsome house among the trees at Tofton, and decidedly the finest stock of port-wine
in the neighborhood of St. Ogg's, was likely to feel himself on a level with public opinion.
And I am not sure that even honest Mr. Tulliver himself, with his general view of law as a
cockpit, might not, under opposite circumstances, have seen a fine appropriateness in the truth
that "Wakem was Wakem"; since I have understood from persons versed in history, that mankind
is not disposed to look narrowly into the conduct of great victors when their victory is on
the right side. Tulliver, then, could be no obstruction to Wakem; on the contrary, he was a
poor devil whom the lawyer had defeated several times; a hot-tempered fellow, who would always
give you a handle against him. Wakem's conscience was not uneasy because he had used a few
tricks against the miller; why should he hate that unsuccessful plaintiff, that pitiable, furious
bull entangled in the meshes of a net?

Still, among the various excesses to which human nature is subject, moralists have never numbered
that of being too fond of the people who openly revile us. The successful Yellow candidate
for the borough of Old Topping, perhaps, feels no pursuant meditative hatred toward the Blue
editor who consoles his subscribers with vituperative rhetoric against Yellow men who sell
their country, and are the demons of private life; but he might not be sorry, if law and opportunity
favored, to kick that Blue editor to a deeper shade of his favorite color. Prosperous men take
a little vengeance now and then, as they take a diversion, when it comes easily in their way,
and is no hindrance to business; and such small unimpassioned revenges have an enormous effect
in life, running through all degrees of pleasant infliction, blocking the fit men out of places,
and blackening characters in unpremeditated talk. Still more, to see people who have been only
insignificantly offensive to us reduced in life and humiliated, without any special effort
of ours, is apt to have a soothing, flattering influence. Providence or some other prince of
this world, it appears, has undertaken the task of retribution for us; and really, by an agreeable
constitution of things, our enemies somehow don't prosper.

Wakem was not without this parenthetic vindictiveness toward the uncomplimentary miller; and
now Mrs. Tulliver had put the notion into his head, it presented itself to him as a pleasure
to do the very thing that would cause Mr. Tulliver the most deadly mortification,-- and a pleasure
of a complex kind, not made up of crude malice, but mingling with it the relish of self-approbation.
To see an enemy humiliated gives a certain contentment, but this is jejune compared with the
highly blent satisfaction of seeing him humiliated by your benevolent action or concession
on his behalf. That is a sort of revenge which falls into the scale of virtue, and Wakem was
not without an intention of keeping that scale respectably filled. He had once had the pleasure
of putting an old enemy of his into one of the St. Ogg's alms-houses, to the rebuilding of
which he had given a large subscription; and here was an opportunity of providing for another
by making him his own servant. Such things give a completeness to prosperity, and contribute
elements of agreeable consciousness that are not dreamed of by that short-sighted, overheated
vindictiveness which goes out its way to wreak itself in direct injury. And Tulliver, with
his rough tongue filed by a sense of obligation, would make a better servant than any chance-fellow
who was cap-in-hand for a situation. Tulliver was known to be a man of proud honesty, and Wakem
was too acute not to believe in the existence of honesty. He was given too observing individuals,
not to judging of them according to maxims, and no one knew better than he that all men were
not like himself. Besides, he intended to overlook the whole business of land and mill pretty
closely; he was fond of these practical rural matters. But there were good reasons for purchasing
Dorlcote Mill, quite apart from any benevolent vengeance on the miller. It was really a capital
investment; besides, Guest &Co. were going to bid for it. Mr. Guest and Mr. Wakem were on friendly
dining terms, and the attorney liked to predominate over a ship-owner and mill-owner who was
a little too loud in the town affairs as well as in his table-talk. For Wakem was not a mere
man of business; he was considered a pleasant fellow in the upper circles of St. Ogg's--chatted
amusingly over his port-wine, did a little amateur farming, and had certainly been an excellent
husband and father; at church, when he went there, he sat under the handsomest of mural monuments
erected to the memory of his wife. Most men would have married again under his circumstances,
but he was said to be more tender to his deformed son than most men were to their best-shapen
offspring. Not that Mr. Wakem had not other sons beside Philip; but toward them he held only
a chiaroscuro parentage, and provided for them in a grade of life duly beneath his own. In
this fact, indeed, there lay the clenching motive to the purchase of Dorlcote Mill. While Mrs.
Tulliver was talking, it had occurred to the rapid-minded lawyer, among all the other circumstances
of the case, that this purchase would, in a few years to come, furnish a highly suitable position
for a certain favorite lad whom he meant to bring on in the world.

These were the mental conditions on which Mrs. Tulliver had undertaken to act persuasively,
and had failed; a fact which may receive some illustration from the remark of a great philosopher,
that fly-fishers fail in preparing their bait so as to make it alluring in the right quarter,
for want of a due acquaintance with the subjectivity of fishes.

Chapter VIII

Daylight on the Wreck

It was a clear frosty January day on which Mr. Tulliver first came downstairs. The bright sun
on the chestnut boughs and the roofs opposite his window had made him impatiently declare that
he would be caged up no longer; he thought everywhere would be more cheery under this sunshine
than his bedroom; for he knew nothing of the bareness below, which made the flood of sunshine
importunate, as if it had an unfeeling pleasure in showing the empty places, and the marks
where well-known objects once had been. The impression on his mind that it was but yesterday
when he received the letter from Mr. Gore was so continually implied in his talk, and the attempts
to convey to him the idea that many weeks had passed and much had happened since then had been
so soon swept away by recurrent forgetfulness, that even Mr. Turnbull had begun to despair
of preparing him to meet the facts by previous knowledge. The full sense of the present could
only be imparted gradually by new experience,--not by mere words, which must remain weaker
than the impressions left by the old experience. This resolution to come downstairs was heard
with trembling by the wife and children. Mrs. Tulliver said Tom must not go to St. Ogg's at
the usual hour, he must wait and see his father downstairs; and Tom complied, though with an
intense inward shrinking from the painful scene. The hearts of all three had been more deeply
dejected than ever during the last few days. For Guest & Co. had not bought the mill; both
mill and land had been knocked down to Wakem, who had been over the premises, and had laid
before Mr. Deane and Mr. Glegg, in Mrs. Tulliver's presence, his willingness to employ Mr.
Tulliver, in case of his recovery, as a manager of the business. This proposition had occasioned
much family debating. Uncles and aunts were almost unanimously of opinion that such an offer
ought not to be rejected when there was nothing in the way but a feeling in Mr. Tulliver's
mind, which, as neither aunts nor uncles shared it, was regarded as entirely unreasonable and
childish,--indeed, as a transferring toward Wakem of that indignation and hatred which Mr.
Tulliver ought properly to have directed against himself for his general quarrelsomeness, and
his special exhibition of it in going to law. Here was an opportunity for Mr. Tulliver to provide
for his wife and daughter without any assistance from his wife's relations, and without that
too evident descent into pauperism which makes it annoying to respectable people to meet the
degraded member of the family by the wayside. Mr. Tulliver, Mrs. Glegg considered, must be
made to feel, when he came to his right mind, that he could never humble himself enough; for
that had come which she had always foreseen would come of his insolence in time past "to them
as were the best friends he'd got to look to." Mr Glegg and Mr. Deane were less stern in their
views, but they both of them thought Tulliver had done enough harm by his hot-tempered crotchets
and ought to put them out of the question when a livelihood was offered him; Wakem showed a
right feeling about the matter,--he had no grudge against Tulliver.

Tom had protested against entertaining the proposition. He shouldn't like his father to be
under Wakem; he thought it would look mean-spirited; but his mother's main distress was the
utter impossibility of ever "turning Mr. Tulliver round about Wakem," or getting him to hear
reason; no, they would all have to go and live in a pigsty on purpose to spite Wakem, who spoke
"so as nobody could be fairer." Indeed, Mrs. Tulliver's mind was reduced to such confusion
by living in this strange medium of unaccountable sorrow, against which she continually appealed
by asking, "Oh dear, what have I done to deserve worse than other women?" that Maggie began
to suspect her poor mother's wits were quite going.

"Tom," she said, when they were out of their father's room together, "we must try to make father
understand a little of what has happened before he goes downstairs. But we must get my mother
away. She will say something that will do harm. Ask Kezia to fetch her down, and keep her engaged
with something in the kitchen."

Kezia was equal to the task. Having declared her intention of staying till the master could
get about again, "wage or no wage," she had found a certain recompense in keeping a strong
hand over her mistress, scolding her for "moithering" herself, and going about all day without
changing her cap, and looking as if she was "mushed." Altogether, this time of trouble was
rather a Saturnalian time to Kezia; she could scold her betters with unreproved freedom. On
this particular occasion there were drying clothes to be fetched in; she wished to know if
one pair of hands could do everything in-doors and out, and observed that she should have thought
it would be good for Mrs. Tulliver to put on her bonnet, and get a breath of fresh air by doing
that needful piece of work. Poor Mrs. Tulliver went submissively downstairs; to be ordered
about by a servant was the last remnant of her household dignities,--she would soon have no
servant to scold her. Mr. Tulliver was resting in his chair a little after the fatigue of dressing,
and Maggie and Tom were seated near him, when Luke entered to ask if he should help master
downstairs.

"Ay, ay, Luke; stop a bit, sit down," said Mr. Tulliver pointing his stick toward a chair,
and looking at him with that pursuant gaze which convalescent persons often have for those
who have tended them, reminding one of an infant gazing about after its nurse. For Luke had
been a constant night-watcher by his master's bed.

"How's the water now, eh, Luke?" said Mr. Tulliver. "Dix hasn't been choking you up again, eh?"

"No, sir, it's all right."

"Ay, I thought not; he won't be in a hurry at that again, now Riley's been to settle him. That
was what I said to Riley yesterday--I said----"

Mr. Tulliver leaned forward, resting his elbows on the armchair, and looking on the ground
as if in search of something, striving after vanishing images like a man struggling against
a doze. Maggie looked at Tom in mute distress, their father's mind was so far off the present,
which would by-and-by thrust itself on his wandering consciousness! Tom was almost ready to
rush away, with that impatience of painful emotion which makes one of the differences between
youth and maiden, man and woman.

"Father," said Maggie, laying her hand on his, "don't you remember that Mr. Riley is dead?"

"Dead?" said Mr. Tulliver, sharply, looking in her face with a strange, examining glance.

"Yes, he died of apoplexy nearly a year ago. I remember hearing you say you had to pay money
for him; and he left his daughters badly off; one of them is under-teacher at Miss Firniss's,
where I've been to school, you know."

"Ah?" said her father, doubtfully, still looking in her face. But as soon as Tom began to speak
he turned to look at him with the same inquiring glances, as if he were rather surprised at
the presence of these two young people. Whenever his mind was wandering in the far past, he
fell into this oblivion of their actual faces; they were not those of the lad and the little
wench who belonged to that past.

"It's a long while since you had the dispute with Dix, father," said Tom. "I remember your
talking about it three years ago, before I went to school at Mr. Stelling's. I've been at school
there three years; don't you remember?"

Mr. Tulliver threw himself backward again, losing the childlike outward glance under a rush
of new ideas, which diverted him from external impressions.

"Ay, ay," he said, after a minute or two, "I've paid a deal o' money--I was determined my son
should have a good eddication; I'd none myself, and I've felt the miss of it. And he'll want
no other fortin, that's what I say--if Wakem was to get the better of me again----"

The thought of Wakem roused new vibrations, and after a moment's pause he began to look at
the coat he had on, and to feel in his side-pocket. Then he turned to Tom, and said in his
old sharp way, "Where have they put Gore's letter?"

It was close at hand in a drawer, for he had often asked for it before.

"You know what there is in the letter, father?" said Tom, as he gave it to him.

"To be sure I do," said Mr. Tulliver, rather angrily. "What o' that? If Furley can't take to
the property, somebody else can; there's plenty o' people in the world besides Furley. But
it's hindering--my not being well--go and tell 'em to get the horse in the gig, Luke; I can
get down to St. Ogg's well enough--Gore's expecting me."

"No, dear father!" Maggie burst out entreatingly; "it's a very long while since all that; you've
been ill a great many weeks,--more than two months; everything is changed."

Mr. Tulliver looked at them all three alternately with a startled gaze; the idea that much
had happened of which he knew nothing had often transiently arrested him before, but it came
upon him now with entire novelty.

"Yes, father," said Tom, in answer to the gaze. "You needn't trouble your mind about business
until you are quite well; everything is settled about that for the present,--about the mill
and the land and the debts."

"What's settled, then?" said his father, angrily.

"Don't you take on too much bout it, sir," said Luke. "You'd ha' paid iverybody if you could,--that's
what I said to Master Tom,--I said you'd ha' paid iverybody if you could."

Good Luke felt, after the manner of contented hard-working men whose lives have been spent
in servitude, that sense of natural fitness in rank which made his master's downfall a tragedy
to him. He was urged, in his slow way, to say something that would express his share in the
family sorrow; and these words, which he had used over and over again to Tom when he wanted
to decline the full payment of his fifty pounds out of the children's money, were the most
ready to his tongue. They were just the words to lay the most painful hold on his master's
bewildered mind.

"Paid everybody?" he said, with vehement agitation, his face flushing, and his eye lighting
up. "Why--what--have they made me a bankrupt?"

"Oh, father, dear father!" said Maggie, who thought that terrible word really represented the
fact; "bear it well, because we love you; your children will always love you. Tom will pay
them all; he says he will, when he's a man."

She felt her father beginning to tremble; his voice trembled too, as he said, after a few moments:

"Ay, my little wench, but I shall never live twice o'er."

"But perhaps you will live to see me pay everybody, father," said Tom, speaking with a great
effort.

"Ah, my lad," said Mr. Tulliver, shaking his head slowly, "but what's broke can never be whole
again; it 'ud be your doing, not mine." Then looking up at him, "You're only sixteen; it's
an up-hill fight for you, but you mustn't throw it at your father; the raskills have been too
many for him. I've given you a good eddication,--that'll start you."

Something in his throat half choked the last words; the flush, which had alarmed his children
because it had so often preceded a recurrence of paralysis, had subsided, and his face looked
pale and tremulous. Tom said nothing; he was still struggling against his inclination to rush
away. His father remained quiet a minute or two, but his mind did not seem to be wandering again.

"Have they sold me up, then?" he said more clamly, as if he were possessed simply by the desire
to know what had happened.

"Everything is sold, father; but we don't know all about the mill and the land yet," said Tom,
anxious to ward off any question leading to the fact that Wakem was the purchaser.

"You must not be surprised to see the room look very bare downstairs, father," said Maggie;
"but there's your chair and the bureau; they're not gone."

"Let us go; help me down, Luke,--I'll go and see everything," said Mr. Tulliver, leaning on
his stick, and stretching out his other hand toward Luke.

"Ay, sir," said Luke, as he gave his arm to his master, "you'll make up your mind to't a bit
better when you've seen iverything; you'll get used to't. That's what my mother says about
her shortness o' breath,--she says she's made friends wi't now, though she fought again' it
sore when it just come on."

Maggie ran on before to see that all was right in the dreary parlor, where the fire, dulled
by the frosty sunshine, seemed part of the general shabbiness. She turned her father's chair,
and pushed aside the table to make an easy way for him, and then stood with a beating heart
to see him enter and look round for the first time. Tom advanced before him, carrying the leg-rest,
and stood beside Maggie on the hearth. Of those two young hearts Tom's suffered the most unmixed
pain, for Maggie, with all her keen susceptibility, yet felt as if the sorrow made larger room
for her love to flow in, and gave breathing-space to her passionate nature. No true boy feels
that; he would rather go and slay the Nemean lion, or perform any round of heroic labors, than
endure perpetual appeals to his pity, for evils over which he can make no conquest.

Mr. Tulliver paused just inside the door, resting on Luke, and looking round him at all the
bare places, which for him were filled with the shadows of departed objects,--the daily companions
of his life. His faculties seemed to be renewing their strength from getting a footing on this
demonstration of the senses.

"Ah!" he said slowly, moving toward his chair, "they've sold me up--they've sold me up."

Then seating himself, and laying down his stick, while Luke left the room, he looked round again.

"They've left the big Bible," he said. "It's got everything in,--when I was born and married;
bring it me, Tom."

The quarto Bible was laid open before him at the fly-leaf, and while he was reading with slowly
travelling eyes Mrs. Tulliver entered the room, but stood in mute surprise to find her husband
down already, and with the great Bible before him.

"Ah," he said, looking at a spot where his finger rested, "my mother was Margaret Beaton; she
died when she was forty-seven,--hers wasn't a long-lived family; we're our mother's children,
Gritty and me are,--we shall go to our last bed before long."

He seemed to be pausing over the record of his sister's birth and marriage, as if it were suggesting
new thoughts to him; then he suddenly looked up at Tom, and said, in a sharp tone of alarm:

"They haven't come upo' Moss for the money as I lent him, have they?"

"No, father," said Tom; "the note was burnt."

Mr. Tulliver turned his eyes on the page again, and presently said:

"Ah--Elizabeth Dodson--it's eighteen year since I married her----"

"Come next Ladyday," said Mrs. Tulliver, going up to his side and looking at the page.

Her husband fixed his eyes earnestly on her face.

"Poor Bessy," he said, "you was a pretty lass then,--everybody said so,--and I used to think
you kept your good looks rarely. But you're sorely aged; don't you bear me ill-will--I meant
to do well by you--we promised one another for better or for worse----"

"But I never thought it 'ud be so for worse as this," said poor Mrs. Tulliver, with the strange,
scared look that had come over her of late; "and my poor father gave me away--and to come on
so all at once----"

"Oh, mother!" said Maggie, "don't talk in that way."

"No, I know you won't let your poor mother speak--that's been the way all my life--your father
never minded what I said--it 'ud have been o' no use for me to beg and pray--and it 'ud be
no use now, not if I was to go down o' my hands and knees----"

"Don't say so, Bessy," said Mr. Tulliver, whose pride, in these first moments of humiliation,
was in abeyance to the sense of some justice in his wife's reproach. "It there's anything left
as I could do to make you amends, I wouldn't say you nay."

"Then we might stay here and get a living, and I might keep among my own sisters,--and me been
such a good wife to you, and never crossed you from week's end to week's end--and they all
say so--they say it 'ud be nothing but right, only you're so turned against Wakem."

"Mother," said Tom, severely, "this is not the time to talk about that."

"Let her be," said Mr. Tulliver. "Say what you mean, Bessy."

"Why, now the mill and the land's all Wakem's, and he's got everything in his hands, what's
the use o' setting your face against him, when he says you may stay here, and speaks as fair
as can be, and says you may manage the business, and have thirty shillings a-week, and a horse
to ride about to market? And where have we got to put our heads? We must go into one o' the
cottages in the village,--and me and my children brought down to that,--and all because you
must set your mind against folks till there's no turning you."

Mr. Tulliver had sunk back in his chair trembling.

"You may do as you like wi' me, Bessy," he said, in a low voice; "I've been the bringing of
you to poverty--this world's too many for me--I'm nought but a bankrupt; it's no use standing
up for anything now."

"Father," said Tom, "I don't agree with my mother or my uncles, and I don't think you ought
to submit to be under Wakem. I get a pound a-week now, and you can find something else to do
when you get well."

"Say no more, Tom, say no more; I've had enough for this day. Give me a kiss, Bessy, and let
us bear one another no ill-will; we shall never be young again--this world's been too many for me."

Chapter IX

An Item Added to the Family Register

That first moment of renunciation and submission was followed by days of violent struggle in
the miller's mind, as the gradual access of bodily strength brought with it increasing ability
to embrace in one view all the conflicting conditions under which he found himself. Feeble
limbs easily resign themselves to be tethered, and when we are subdued by sickness it seems
possible to us to fulfil pledges which the old vigor comes back and breaks. There were times
when poor Tulliver thought the fulfilment of his promise to Bessy was something quite too hard
for human nature; he had promised her without knowing what she was going to say,--she might
as well have asked him to carry a ton weight on his back. But again, there were many feelings
arguing on her side, besides the sense that life had been made hard to her by having married
him. He saw a possibility, by much pinching, of saving money out of his salary toward paying
a second dividend to his creditors, and it would not be easy elsewhere to get a situation such
as he could fill.

He had led an easy life, ordering much and working little, and had no aptitude for any new
business. He must perhaps take to day-labor, and his wife must have help from her sisters,--a
prospect doubly bitter to him, now they had let all Bessy's precious things be sold, probably
because they liked to set her against him, by making her feel that he had brought her to that
pass. He listened to their admonitory talk, when they came to urge on him what he was bound
to do for poor Bessy's sake, with averted eyes, that every now and then flashed on them furtively
when their backs were turned. Nothing but the dread of needing their help could have made it
an easier alternative to take their advice.

But the strongest influence of all was the love of the old premises where he had run about
when he was a boy, just as Tom had done after him. The Tullivers had lived on this spot for
generations, and he had sat listening on a low stool on winter evenings while his father talked
of the old half-timbered mill that had been there before the last great floods which damaged
it so that his grandfather pulled it down and built the new one. It was when he got able to
walk about and look at all the old objects that he felt the strain of his clinging affection
for the old home as part of his life, part of himself. He couldn't bear to think of himself
living on any other spot than this, where he knew the sound of every gate door, and felt that
the shape and color of every roof and weather-stain and broken hillock was good, because his
growing senses had been fed on them. Our instructed vagrancy, which was hardly time to linger
by the hedgerows, but runs away early to the tropics, and is at home with palms and banyans,--which
is nourished on books of travel and stretches the theatre of its imagination to the Zambesi,--can
hardly get a dim notion of what an old-fashioned man like Tulliver felt for this spot, where
all his memories centred, and where life seemed like a familiar smooth-handled tool that the
fingers clutch with loving ease. And just now he was living in that freshened memory of the
far-off time which comes to us in the passive hours of recovery from sickness.

"Ay, Luke," he said one afternoon, as he stood looking over the orchard gate, "I remember the
day they planted those apple-trees. My father was a huge man for planting,--it was like a merry-making
to him to get a cart full o' young trees; and I used to stand i' the cold with him, and follow
him about like a dog."

Then he turned round, and leaning against the gate-post, looked at the opposite buildings.

"The old mill 'ud miss me, I think, Luke. There's a story as when the mill changes hands, the
river's angry; I've heard my father say it many a time. There's no telling whether there mayn't
be summat in the story, for this is a puzzling world, and Old Harry's got a finger in it--it's
been too many for me, I know."

"Ay, sir," said Luke, with soothing sympathy, "what wi' the rust on the wheat, an' the firin'
o' the ricks an' that, as I've seen i' my time,--things often looks comical; there's the bacon
fat wi' our last pig run away like butter,--it leaves nought but a scratchin'."

"It's just as if it was yesterday, now," Mr. Tulliver went on, "when my father began the malting.
I remember, the day they finished the malt-house, I thought summat great was to come of it;
for we'd a plum-pudding that day and a bit of a feast, and I said to my mother,--she was a
fine dark-eyed woman, my mother was,--the little wench 'ull be as like her as two peas." Here
Mr. Tulliver put his stick between his legs, and took out his snuff-box, for the greater enjoyment
of this anecdote, which dropped from him in fragments, as if he every other moment lost narration
in vision. "I was a little chap no higher much than my mother's knee,--she was sore fond of
us children, Gritty and me,--and so I said to her, 'Mother,' I said, 'shall we have plum-pudding
every day because o' the malt-house? She used to tell me o' that till her dying day. She was
but a young woman when she died, my mother was. But it's forty good year since they finished
the malt-house, and it isn't many days out of 'em all as I haven't looked out into the yard
there, the first thing in the morning,--all weathers, from year's end to year's end. I should
go off my head in a new place. I should be like as if I'd lost my way. It's all hard, whichever
way I look at it,--the harness 'ull gall me, but it 'ud be summat to draw along the old road,
instead of a new un."

"Ay, sir," said Luke, "you'd be a deal better here nor in some new place. I can't abide new
places mysen: things is allays awk'ard,--narrow-wheeled waggins, belike, and the stiles all
another sort, an' oat-cake i' some places, tow'rt th' head o' the Floss, there. It's poor work,
changing your country-side."

"But I doubt, Luke, they'll be for getting rid o' Ben, and making you do with a lad; and I
must help a bit wi' the mill. You'll have a worse place."

"Ne'er mind, sir," said Luke, "I sha'n't plague mysen. I'n been wi' you twenty year, an' you
can't get twenty year wi' whistlin' for 'em, no more nor you can make the trees grow: you mun
wait till God A'mighty sends 'em. I can't abide new victual nor new faces, I can't,--you niver
know but what they'll gripe you."

The walk was finished in silence after this, for Luke had disburthened himself of thoughts
to an extent that left his conversational resources quite barren, and Mr. Tulliver had relapsed
from his recollections into a painful meditation on the choice of hardships before him. Maggie
noticed that he was unusually absent that evening at tea; and afterward he sat leaning forward
in his chair, looking at the ground, moving his lips, and shaking his head from time to time.
Then he looked hard at Mrs. Tulliver, who was knitting opposite him, then at Maggie, who, as
she bent over her sewing, was intensely conscious of some drama going forward in her father's
mind. Suddenly he took up the poker and broke the large coal fiercely.

"Dear heart, Mr. Tulliver, what can you be thinking of?" said his wife, looking up in alarm;
"it's very wasteful, breaking the coal, and we've got hardly any large coal left, and I don't
know where the rest is to come from."

"I don't think you're quite so well to-night, are you, father?" said Maggie; "you seem uneasy."

"Why, how is it Tom doesn't come?" said Mr. Tulliver, impatiently.

"Dear heart, is it time? I must go and get his supper," said Mrs. Tulliver, laying down her
knitting, and leaving the room.

"It's nigh upon half-past eight," said Mr. Tulliver. "He'll be here soon. Go, go and get the
big Bible, and open it at the beginning, where everything's set down. And get the pen and ink."

Maggie obeyed, wondering; but her father gave no further orders, and only sat listening for
Tom's footfall on the gravel, apparently irritated by the wind, which had risen, and was roaring
so as to drown all other sounds. There was a strange light in his eyes that rather frightened
Maggie; she began to wish that Tom would come, too.

"There he is, then," said Mr. Tulliver, in an excited way, when the knock came at last. Maggie
went to open the door, but her mother came out of the kitchen hurriedly, saying, "Stop a bit,
Maggie; I'll open it."

Mrs. Tulliver had begun to be a little frightened at her boy, but she was jealous of every
office others did for him.

"Your supper's ready by the kitchen-fire, my boy," she said, as he took off his hat and coat.
"You shall have it by yourself, just as you like, and I won't speak to you."

"I think my father wants Tom, mother," said Maggie; "he must come into the parlor first."

Tom entered with his usual saddened evening face, but his eyes fell immediately on the open
Bible and the inkstand, and he glanced with a look of anxious surprise at his father, who was
saying,--

"Come, come, you're late; I want you."

"Is there anything the matter, father?" said Tom.

"You sit down, all of you," said Mr. Tulliver, peremptorily.

"And, Tom, sit down here; I've got something for you to write i' the Bible."

They all three sat down, looking at him. He began to speak slowly, looking first at his wife.

"I've made up my mind, Bessy, and I'll be as good as my word to you. There'll be the same grave
made for us to lie down in, and we mustn't be bearing one another ill-will. I'll stop in the
old place, and I'll serve under Wakem, and I'll serve him like an honest man; there's no Tulliver
but what's honest, mind that, Tom,"--here his voice rose,--"they'll have it to throw up against
me as I paid a dividend, but it wasn't my fault; it was because there's raskills in the world.
They've been too many for me, and I must give in. I'll put my neck in harness,--for you've
a right to say as I've brought you into trouble, Bessy,--and I'll serve him as honest as if
he was no raskill; I'm an honest man, though I shall never hold my head up no more. I'm a tree
as is broke--a tree as is broke."

He paused and looked on the ground. Then suddenly raising his head, he said, in a louder yet
deeper tone:

"But I won't forgive him! I know what they say, he never meant me any harm. That's the way
Old Harry props up the rascals. He's been at the bottom of everything; but he's a fine gentleman,--I
know, I know. I shouldn't ha' gone to law, they say. But who made it so as there was no arbitratin',
and no justice to be got? It signifies nothing to him, I know that; he's one o' them fine gentlemen
as get money by doing business for poorer folks, and when he's made beggars of 'em he'll give
'em charity. I won't forgive him! I wish he might be punished with shame till his own son 'ud
like to forget him. I wish he may do summat as they'd make him work at the treadmill! But he
won't,--he's too big a raskill to let the law lay hold on him. And you mind this, Tom,--you
never forgive him neither, if you mean to be my son. There'll maybe come a time when you may
make him feel; it'll never come to me; I'n got my head under the yoke. Now write--write it
i' the Bible."

"Oh, father, what?" said Maggie, sinking down by his knee, pale and trembling. "It's wicked
to curse and bear malice."

"It isn't wicked, I tell you," said her father, fiercely. "It's wicked as the raskills should
prosper; it's the Devil's doing. Do as I tell you, Tom. Write."

"What am I to write?" said Tom, with gloomy submission.

"Write as your father, Edward Tulliver, took service under John Wakem, the man as had helped
to ruin him, because I'd promised my wife to make her what amends I could for her trouble,
and because I wanted to die in th' old place where I was born and my father was born. Put that
i' the right words--you know how--and then write, as I don't forgive Wakem for all that; and
for all I'll serve him honest, I wish evil may befall him. Write that."

There was a dead silence as Tom's pen moved along the paper; Mrs. Tulliver looked scared, and
Maggie trembled like a leaf.

"Now let me hear what you've wrote," said Mr. Tulliver, Tom read aloud slowly.

"Now write--write as you'll remember what Wakem's done to your father, and you'll make him
and his feel it, if ever the day comes. And sign your name Thomas Tulliver."

"Oh no, father, dear father!" said Maggie, almost choked with fear. "You shouldn't make Tom
write that."

"Be quiet, Maggie!" said Tom. "I shall write it."

Book IV

The Valley of Humiliation

Chapter I

A Variation of Protestantism Unknown to Bossuet

Journeying down the Rhone on a summer's day, you have perhaps felt the sunshine made dreary
by those ruined villages which stud the banks in certain parts of its course, telling how the
swift river once rose, like an angry, destroying god, sweeping down the feeble generations
whose breath is in their nostrils, and making their dwellings a desolation. Strange contrast,
you may have thought, between the effect produced on us by these dismal remnants of commonplace
houses, which in their best days were but the sign of a sordid life, belonging in all its details
to our own vulgar era, and the effect produced by those ruins on the castled Rhine, which have
crumbled and mellowed into such harmony with the green and rocky steeps that they seem to have
a natural fitness, like the mountain-pine; nay, even in the day when they were built they must
have had this fitness, as if they had been raised by an earth-born race, who had inherited
from their mighty parent a sublime instinct of form. And that was a day of romance; If those
robber-barons were somewhat grim and drunken ogres, they had a certain grandeur of the wild
beast in them,--they were forest boars with tusks, tearing and rending, not the ordinary domestic
grunter; they represented the demon forces forever in collision with beauty, virtue, and the
gentle uses of life; they made a fine contrast in the picture with the wandering minstrel,
the soft-lipped princess, the pious recluse, and the timid Israelite. That was a time of color,
when the sunlight fell on glancing steel and floating banners; a time of adventure and fierce
struggle,--nay, of living, religious art and religious enthusiasm; for were not cathedrals
built in those days, and did not great emperors leave their Western palaces to die before the
infidel strongholds in the sacred East? Therefore it is that these Rhine castles thrill me
with a sense of poetry; they belong to the grand historic life of humanity, and raise up for
me the vision of an echo. But these dead-tinted, hollow-eyed, angular skeletons of villages
on the Rhone oppress me with the feeling that human life--very much of it--is a narrow, ugly,
grovelling existence, which even calamity does not elevate, but rather tends to exhibit in
all its bare vulgarity of conception; and I have a cruel conviction that the lives these ruins
are the traces of were part of a gross sum of obscure vitality, that will be swept into the
same oblivion with the generations of ants and beavers.

Perhaps something akin to this oppressive feeling may have weighed upon you in watching this
old-fashioned family life on the banks of the Floss, which even sorrow hardly suffices to lift
above the level of the tragi-comic. It is a sordid life, you say, this of the Tullivers and
Dodsons, irradiated by no sublime principles, no romantic visions, no active, self-renouncing
faith; moved by none of those wild, uncontrollable passions which create the dark shadows of
misery and crime; without that primitive, rough simplicity of wants, that hard, submissive,
ill-paid toil, that childlike spelling-out of what nature has written, which gives its poetry
to peasant life. Here one has conventional worldly notions and habits without instruction and
without polish, surely the most prosaic form of human life; proud respectability in a gig of
unfashionable build; worldliness without side-dishes. Observing these people narrowly, even
when the iron hand of misfortune has shaken them from their unquestioning hold on the world,
one sees little trace of religion, still less of a distinctively Christian creed. Their belief
in the Unseen, so far as it manifests itself at all, seems to be rather a pagan kind; their
moral notions, though held with strong tenacity, seem to have no standard beyond hereditary
custom. You could not live among such people; you are stifled for want of an outlet toward
something beautiful, great, or noble; you are irritated with these dull men and women, as a
kind of population out of keeping with the earth on which they live,--with this rich plain
where the great river flows forever onward, and links the small pulse of the old English town
with the beatings of the world's mighty heart. A vigorous superstition, that lashes its gods
or lashes its own back, seems to be more congruous with the mystery of the human lot, than
the mental condition of these emmet-like Dodsons and Tullivers.

I share with you this sense of oppressive narrowness; but it is necessary that we should feel
it, if we care to understand how it acted on the lives of Tom and Maggie,--how it has acted
on young natures in many generations, that in the onward tendency of human things have risen
above the mental level of the generation before them, to which they have been nevertheless
tied by the strongest fibres of their hearts. The suffering, whether of martyr or victim, which
belongs to every historical advance of mankind, is represented in this way in every town, and
by hundreds of obscure hearths; and we need not shrink from this comparison of small things
with great; for does not science tell us that its highest striving is after the ascertainment
of a unity which shall bind the smallest things with the greatest? In natural science, I have
understood, there is nothing petty to the mind that has a large vision of relations, and to
which every single object suggests a vast sum of conditions. It is surely the same with the
observation of human life.

Certainly the religious and moral ideas of the Dodsons and Tullivers were of too specific a
kind to be arrived at deductively, from the statement that they were part of the Protestant
population of Great Britain. Their theory of life had its core of soundness, as all theories
must have on which decent and prosperous families have been reared and have flourished; but
it had the very slightest tincture of theology. If, in the maiden days of the Dodson sisters,
their Bibles opened more easily at some parts than others, it was because of dried tulip-petals,
which had been distributed quite impartially, without preference for the historical, devotional,
or doctrinal. Their religion was of a simple, semi-pagan kind, but there was no heresy in it,--if
heresy properly means choice,--for they didn't know there was any other religion, except that
of chapel-goers, which appeared to run in families, like asthma. How should they know? The
vicar of their pleasant rural parish was not a controversialist, but a good hand at whist,
and one who had a joke always ready for a blooming female parishioner. The religion of the
Dodsons consisted in revering whatever was customary and respectable; it was necessary to be
baptized, else one could not be buried in the church-yard, and to take the sacrament before
death, as a security against more dimly understood perils; but it was of equal necessity to
have the proper pall-bearers and well-cured hams at one's funeral, and to leave an unimpeachable
will. A Dodson would not be taxed with the omission of anything that was becoming, or that
belonged to that eternal fitness of things which was plainly indicated in the practice of the
most substantial parishioners, and in the family traditions,--such as obedience to parents,
faithfulness to kindred, industry, rigid honesty, thrift, the thorough scouring of wooden and
copper utensils, the hoarding of coins likely to disappear from the currency, the production
of first-rate commodities for the market, and the general preference of whatever was home-made.
The Dodsons were a very proud race, and their pride lay in the utter frustration of all desire
to tax them with a breach of traditional duty or propriety. A wholesome pride in many respects,
since it identified honor with perfect integrity, thoroughness of work, and faithfulness to
admitted rules; and society owes some worthy qualities in many of her members to mothers of
the Dodson class, who made their butter and their fromenty well, and would have felt disgraced
to make it otherwise. To be honest and poor was never a Dodson motto, still less to seem rich
though being poor; rather, the family badge was to be honest and rich, and not only rich, but
richer than was supposed. To live respected, and have the proper bearers at your funeral, was
an achievement of the ends of existence that would be entirely nullified if, on the reading
of your will, you sank in the opinion of your fellow-men, either by turning out to be poorer
than they expected, or by leaving your money in a capricious manner, without strict regard
to degrees of kin. The right thing must always be done toward kindred. The right thing was
to correct them severely, if they were other than a credit to the family, but still not to
alienate from them the smallest rightful share in the family shoebuckles and other property.
A conspicuous quality in the Dodson character was its genuineness; its vices and virtues alike
were phases of a proud honest egoism, which had a hearty dislike to whatever made against its
own credit and interest, and would be frankly hard of speech to inconvenient "kin," but would
never forsake or ignore them,--would not let them want bread, but only require them to eat
it with bitter herbs.

The same sort of traditional belief ran in the Tulliver veins, but it was carried in richer
blood, having elements of generous imprudence, warm affection, and hot-tempered rashness. Mr.
Tulliver's grandfather had been heard to say that he was descended from one Ralph Tulliver,
a wonderfully clever fellow, who had ruined himself. It is likely enough that the clever Ralph
was a high liver, rode spirited horses, and was very decidedly of his own opinion. On the other
hand, nobody had ever heard of a Dodson who had ruined himself; it was not the way of that family.

If such were the views of life on which the Dodsons and Tullivers had been reared in the praiseworthy
past of Pitt and high prices, you will infer from what you already know concerning the state
of society in St. Ogg's, that there had been no highly modifying influence to act on them in
their maturer life. It was still possible, even in that later time of anti-Catholic preaching,
for people to hold many pagan ideas, and believe themselves good church-people, notwithstanding;
so we need hardly feel any surprise at the fact that Mr. Tulliver, though a regular church-goer,
recorded his vindictiveness on the fly-leaf of his Bible. It was not that any harm could be
said concerning the vicar of that charming rural parish to which Dorlcote Mill belonged; he
was a man of excellent family, an irreproachable bachelor, of elegant pursuits,--had taken
honors, and held a fellowship. Mr. Tulliver regarded him with dutiful respect, as he did everything
else belonging to the church-service; but he considered that church was one thing and common-sense
another, and he wanted nobody to tell him what commonsense was. Certain seeds which are required
to find a nidus for themselves under unfavorable circumstances have been supplied by nature
with an apparatus of hooks, so that they will get a hold on very unreceptive surfaces. The
spiritual seed which had been scattered over Mr. Tulliver had apparently been destitute of
any corresponding provision, and had slipped off to the winds again, from a total absence of hooks.

Chapter II

The Torn Nest Is Pierced by the Thorns

There is something sustaining in the very agitation that accompanies the first shocks of trouble,
just as an acute pain is often a stimulus, and produces an excitement which is transient strength.
It is in the slow, changed life that follows; in the time when sorrow has become stale, and
has no longer an emotive intensity that counteracts its pain; in the time when day follows
day in dull, unexpectant sameness, and trial is a dreary routine,--it is then that despair
threatens; it is then that the peremptory hunger of the soul is felt, and eye and ear are strained
after some unlearned secret of our existence, which shall give to endurance the nature of satisfaction.

This time of utmost need was come to Maggie, with her short span of thirteen years. To the
usual precocity of the girl, she added that early experience of struggle, of conflict between
the inward impulse and outward fact, which is the lot of every imaginative and passionate nature;
and the years since she hammered the nails into her wooden Fetish among the worm-eaten shelves
of the attic had been filled with so eager a life in the triple world of Reality, Books, and
Waking Dreams, that Maggie was strangely old for her years in everything except in her entire
want of that prudence and self-command which were the qualities that made Tom manly in the
midst of his intellectual boyishness. And now her lot was beginning to have a still, sad monotony,
which threw her more than ever on her inward self. Her father was able to attend to business
again, his affairs were settled, and he was acting as Wakem's manager on the old spot. Tom
went to and fro every morning and evening, and became more and more silent in the short intervals
at home; what was there to say? One day was like another; and Tom's interest in life, driven
back and crushed on every other side, was concentrating itself into the one channel of ambitious
resistance to misfortune. The peculiarities of his father and mother were very irksome to him,
now they were laid bare of all the softening accompaniments of an easy, prosperous home; for
Tom had very clear, prosaic eyes, not apt to be dimmed by mists of feeling or imagination.
Poor Mrs. Tulliver, it seemed, would never recover her old self, her placid household activity;
how could she? The objects among which her mind had moved complacently were all gone,--all
the little hopes and schemes and speculations, all the pleasant little cares about her treasures
which had made the world quite comprehensible to her for a quarter of a century, since she
had made her first purchase of the sugar-tongs, had been suddenly snatched away from her, and
she remained bewildered in this empty life. Why that should have happened to her which had
not happened to other women remained an insoluble question by which she expressed her perpetual
ruminating comparison of the past with the present. It was piteous to see the comely woman
getting thinner and more worn under a bodily as well as mental restlessness, which made her
often wander about the empty house after her work was done, until Maggie, becoming alarmed
about her, would seek her, and bring her down by telling her how it vexed Tom that she was
injuring her health by never sitting down and resting herself. Yet amidst this helpless imbecility
there was a touching trait of humble, self-devoting maternity, which made Maggie feel tenderly
toward her poor mother amidst all the little wearing griefs caused by her mental feebleness.
She would let Maggie do none of the work that was heaviest and most soiling to the hands, and
was quite peevish when Maggie attempted to relieve her from her grate-brushing and scouring:
"Let it alone, my dear; your hands 'ull get as hard as hard," she would say; "it's your mother's
place to do that. I can't do the sewing--my eyes fail me." And she would still brush and carefully
tend Maggie's hair, which she had become reconciled to, in spite of its refusal to curl, now
it was so long and massy. Maggie was not her pet child, and, in general, would have been much
better if she had been quite different; yet the womanly heart, so bruised in its small personal
desires, found a future to rest on in the life of this young thing, and the mother pleased
herself with wearing out her own hands to save the hands that had so much more life in them.

But the constant presence of her mother's regretful bewilderment was less painful to Maggie
than that of her father's sullen, incommunicative depression. As long as the paralysis was
upon him, and it seemed as if he might always be in a childlike condition of dependence,--as
long as he was still only half awakened to his trouble,--Maggie had felt the strong tide of
pitying love almost as an inspiration, a new power, that would make the most difficult life
easy for his sake; but now, instead of childlike dependence, there had come a taciturn, hard
concentration of purpose, in strange contrast with his old vehement communicativeness and high
spirit; and this lasted from day to day, and from week to week, the dull eye never brightening
with any eagerness or any joy. It is something cruelly incomprehensible to youthful natures,
this sombre sameness in middle-aged and elderly people, whose life has resulted in disappointment
and discontent, to whose faces a smile becomes so strange that the sad lines all about the
lips and brow seem to take no notice of it, and it hurries away again for want of a welcome.
"Why will they not kindle up and be glad sometimes?" thinks young elasticity. "It would be
so easy if they only liked to do it." And these leaden clouds that never part are apt to create
impatience even in the filial affection that streams forth in nothing but tenderness and pity
in the time of more obvious affliction.

Mr. Tulliver lingered nowhere away from home; he hurried away from market, he refused all invitations
to stay and chat, as in old times, in the houses where he called on business. He could not
be reconciled with his lot. There was no attitude in which his pride did not feel its bruises;
and in all behavior toward him, whether kind or cold, he detected an allusion to the change
in his circumstances. Even the days on which Wakem came to ride round the land and inquire
into the business were not so black to him as those market-days on which he had met several
creditors who had accepted a composition from him. To save something toward the repayment of
those creditors was the object toward which he was now bending all his thoughts and efforts;
and under the influence of this all-compelling demand of his nature, the somewhat profuse man,
who hated to be stinted or to stint any one else in his own house, was gradually metamorphosed
into the keen-eyed grudger of morsels. Mrs. Tulliver could not economize enough to satisfy
him, in their food and firing; and he would eat nothing himself but what was of the coarsest
quality. Tom, though depressed and strongly repelled by his father's sullenness, and the dreariness
of home, entered thoroughly into his father's feelings about paying the creditors; and the
poor lad brought his first quarter's money, with a delicious sense of achievement, and gave
it to his father to put into the tin box which held the savings. The little store of sovereigns
in the tin box seemed to be the only sight that brought a faint beam of pleasure into the miller's
eyes,--faint and transient, for it was soon dispelled by the thought that the time would be
long--perhaps longer than his life,--before the narrow savings could remove the hateful incubus
of debt. A deficit of more than five hundred pounds, with the accumulating interest, seemed
a deep pit to fill with the savings from thirty shillings a-week, even when Tom's probable
savings were to be added. On this one point there was entire community of feeling in the four
widely differing beings who sat round the dying fire of sticks, which made a cheap warmth for
them on the verge of bedtime. Mrs. Tulliver carried the proud integrity of the Dodsons in her
blood, and had been brought up to think that to wrong people of their money, which was another
phrase for debt, was a sort of moral pillory; it would have been wickedness, to her mind, to
have run counter to her husband's desire to "do the right thing," and retrieve his name. She
had a confused, dreamy notion that, if the creditors were all paid, her plate and linen ought
to come back to her; but she had an inbred perception that while people owed money they were
unable to pay, they couldn't rightly call anything their own. She murmured a little that Mr.
Tulliver so peremptorily refused to receive anything in repayment from Mr. and Mrs. Moss; but
to all his requirements of household economy she was submissive to the point of denying herself
the cheapest indulgences of mere flavor; her only rebellion was to smuggle into the kitchen
something that would make rather a better supper than usual for Tom.

These narrow notions about debt, held by the old fashioned Tullivers, may perhaps excite a
smile on the faces of many readers in these days of wide commercial views and wide philosophy,
according to which everything rights itself without any trouble of ours. The fact that my tradesman
is out of pocket by me is to be looked at through the serene certainty that somebody else's
tradesman is in pocket by somebody else; and since there must be bad debts in the world, why,
it is mere egoism not to like that we in particular should make them instead of our fellow-citizens.
I am telling the history of very simple people, who had never had any illuminating doubts as
to personal integrity and honor.

Under all this grim melancholy and narrowing concentration of desire, Mr. Tulliver retained
the feeling toward his "little wench" which made her presence a need to him, though it would
not suffice to cheer him. She was still the desire of his eyes; but the sweet spring of fatherly
love was now mingled with bitterness, like everything else. When Maggie laid down her work
at night, it was her habit to get a low stool and sit by her father's knee, leaning her cheek
against it. How she wished he would stroke her head, or give some sign that he was soothed
by the sense that he had a daughter who loved him! But now she got no answer to her little
caresses, either from her father or from Tom,--the two idols of her life. Tom was weary and
abstracted in the short intervals when he was at home, and her father was bitterly preoccupied
with the thought that the girl was growing up, was shooting up into a woman; and how was she
to do well in life? She had a poor chance for marrying, down in the world as they were. And
he hated the thought of her marrying poorly, as her aunt Gritty had done; that would be a thing
to make him turn in his grave,--the little wench so pulled down by children and toil, as her
aunt Moss was. When uncultured minds, confined to a narrow range of personal experience, are
under the pressure of continued misfortune, their inward life is apt to become a perpetually
repeated round of sad and bitter thoughts; the same words, the same scenes, are revolved over
and over again, the same mood accompanies them; the end of the year finds them as much what
they were at the beginning as if they were machines set to a recurrent series of movements.

The sameness of the days was broken by few visitors. Uncles and aunts paid only short visits
now; of course, they could not stay to meals, and the constraint caused by Mr. Tulliver's savage
silence, which seemed to add to the hollow resonance of the bare, uncarpeted room when the
aunts were talking, heightened the unpleasantness of these family visits on all sides, and
tended to make them rare. As for other acquaintances, there is a chill air surrounding those
who are down in the world, and people are glad to get away from them, as from a cold room;
human beings, mere men and women, without furniture, without anything to offer you, who have
ceased to count as anybody, present an embarrassing negation of reasons for wishing to see
them, or of subjects on which to converse with them. At that distant day, there was a dreary
isolation in the civilized Christian society of these realms for families that had dropped
below their original level, unless they belonged to a sectarian church, which gets some warmth
of brotherhood by walling in the sacred fire.

Chapter III

A Voice from the Past

One afternoon, when the chestnuts were coming into flower, Maggie had brought her chair outside
the front door, and was seated there with a book on her knees. Her dark eyes had wandered from
the book, but they did not seem to be enjoying the sunshine which pierced the screen of jasmine
on the projecting porch at her right, and threw leafy shadows on her pale round cheek; they
seemed rather to be searching for something that was not disclosed by the sunshine. It had
been a more miserable day than usual; her father, after a visit of Wakem's had had a paroxysm
of rage, in which for some trifling fault he had beaten the boy who served in the mill. Once
before, since his illness, he had had a similar paroxysm, in which he had beaten his horse,
and the scene had left a lasting terror in Maggie's mind. The thought had risen, that some
time or other he might beat her mother if she happened to speak in her feeble way at the wrong
moment. The keenest of all dread with her was lest her father should add to his present misfortune
the wretchedness of doing something irretrievably disgraceful. The battered school-book of
Tom's which she held on her knees could give her no fortitude under the pressure of that dread;
and again and again her eyes had filled with tears, as they wandered vaguely, seeing neither
the chestnut-trees, nor the distant horizon, but only future scenes of home-sorrow.

Suddenly she was roused by the sound of the opening gate and of footsteps on the gravel. It
was not Tom who was entering, but a man in a sealskin cap and a blue plush waistcoat, carrying
a pack on his back, and followed closely by a bullterrier of brindled coat and defiant aspect.

"Oh, Bob, it's you!" said Maggie, starting up with a smile of pleased recognition, for there
had been no abundance of kind acts to efface the recollection of Bob's generosity; "I'm so
glad to see you."

